# Debug Info

Debug info is a collection of information generated by the compiler that allows debuggers to
correctly interpret the state of a program while it is running. That includes things like mapping
instruction addresses to lines of code in the source file, and type layout information so that
bytes in memory can be read and displayed in a meaningful way.

Debug info can be a slightly overloaded term, covering all the layers between Rust MIR, and the
end-user seeing the output of their debugger onscreen. In brief, the stack from beginning to end is
as follows:

1. Rustc inspects the MIR and communicates the relevant source, symbol, and type information to LLVM
2. LLVM translates this information into a target-specific debug info format during compilation
3. A debugger reads and interprets the debug info, mapping source-lines and allowing the debugee's
variables in memory to be located and read with the correct layout
4. Built-in debugger formatting and styling is applied to variables
5. User-defined scripts are run, formatting and styling the variables further
6. The debugger frontend displays the variable to the user, possibly through the means of additional
API layers (e.g. VSCode extension by way of the
[Debug Adapter Protocol](https://microsoft.github.io/debug-adapter-protocol/))


> NOTE: This subsection of the dev guide is perhaps more detailed than necessary. It aims to collect
> a large amount of scattered information into one place and equip the reader with as firm a grasp of
> the entire debug stack as possible.
>
> If you are only interested in working on the visualizer
> scripts, the information in the [debugger-visualizers](./debugger-visualizers.md) and
> [testing](./testing.md) will suffice. If you need to make changes to Rust's debug node generation,
> please see [rust-codegen](./rust-codegen.md). All other sections are supplementary, but can be
> vital to understanding some of the compromises the visualizers or codegen need to make. It can
> also be valuable to know when a problem might be better solved in LLVM or the debugger itself.

# DWARF

The is the primary debug info format for `*-gnu` targets. It is typically bundled in with the
binary, but it [can be generated as a separate file](https://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/DebugFission). The
DWARF standard is available [here](https://dwarfstd.org/).

> NOTE: To inspect DWARF debug info, [gimli](https://crates.io/crates/gimli) can be used
> programatically. If you prefer a GUI, the author recommends [DWEX](https://github.com/sevaa/dwex)

# PDB/CodeView

The primary debug info format for `*-msvc` targets. PDB is a proprietary container format created by
Microsoft that, unfortunately,
[has multiple meanings](https://docs.rs/ms-pdb/0.1.10/ms_pdb/taster/enum.Flavor.html).
We are concerned with ordinary PDB files, as Portable PDB is used mainly for .Net applications. PDB
files are separate from the compiled binary and use the `.pdb` extension.

PDB files contain CodeView objects, equivalent to DWARF's tags. CodeView, the debugger that
consumed CodeView objects, was originally released in 1985. Its original intent was for C debugging,
and was later extended to support Visual C++. There are still minor alterations to the format to
support modern architectures and languages, but many of these changes are undocumented and/or
sparsely used.

It is important to keep this context in mind when working with CodeView objects. Due to its origins,
the "feature-set" of these objects is very limited, and focused around the core features of C. It
does not have many of the convenience or features of modern DWARF standards. A fair number of
workarounds exist within the debug info stack to compensate for CodeView's shortcomings.

Due to its proprietary nature, it is very difficult to find information about PDB and CodeView. Many
of the sources were made at vastly different times and contain incomplete or somewhat contradictory
information. As such this page will aim to collect as many sources as possible.

* [CodeView 1.0 specification](./CodeView.pdf)
* LLVM
    * [CodeView Overview](https://llvm.org/docs/SourceLevelDebugging.html#codeview-debug-info-format)
    * [PDB Overview and technical details](https://llvm.org/docs/PDB/index.html)
* Microsoft
    * [microsoft-pdb](https://github.com/microsoft/microsoft-pdb) - A C/C++ implementation of a PDB
    reader. The implementation does not contain the full PDB or CodeView specification, but does
    contain enough information for other PDB consumers to be written. At time of writing (Nov 2025),
    this repo has been archived for several years.
    * [pdb-rs](https://github.com/microsoft/pdb-rs/) - A Rust-based PDB reader and writer based on
    other publicly-available information. Does not guarantee stability or spec compliance. Also
    contains `pdbtool`, which can dump PDB files (`cargo install pdbtool`)
    * [Debug Interface Access SDK](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/debugger/debug-interface-access/getting-started-debug-interface-access-sdk).
    While it does not document the PDB format directly, details can be gleaned from the interface
    itself.

# Debuggers

Rust supports 3 major debuggers: GDB, LLDB, and CDB. Each has its own set of requirements,
limitations, and quirks. This unfortunately creates a large surface area to account for.

> NOTE: CDB is a proprietary debugger created by Microsoft. The underlying engine also powers
>WinDbg, KD, the Microsoft C/C++ extension for VSCode, and part of the Visual Studio Debugger. In
>these docs, it will be referred to as CDB for consistency

While GDB and LLDB do offer facilities to natively support Rust's value layout, this isn't
completely necessary. Rust currently outputs debug info very similar to that of C++, allowing
debuggers without Rust support to work with a slightly degraded experience. More detail will be
included in later sections, but here is a quick reference for the capabilities of each debugger:

| Debugger | Debug Info Format | Native Rust support | Expression Style | Visualizer Scripts |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| GDB | DWARF | Full | Rust | Python |
| LLDB | DWARF and PDB | Partial | C/C++ | Python |
| CDB | PDB | None | C/C++ | Natvis |

> IMPORTANT: CDB can be assumed to run only on Windows. No assumptions can be made about the OS
>running GDB or LLDB.

## Unsupported

Below, are several unsupported debuggers that are of particular note due to their potential impact
in the future.

* [Bugstalker](https://github.com/godzie44/BugStalker) is an x86-64 Linux debugger written in Rust,
specifically to debug Rust programs. While promising, it is still in early development.
* [RAD Debugger](https://github.com/EpicGamesExt/raddebugger) is a Windows-only GUI debugger. It has
a custom debug info format that PDB is translated into. The project also includes a linker that can
generate their new debug info format during the linking phase.

---

# Rust Codegen

The first phase in debug info generation requires Rust to inspect the MIR of the program and
communicate it to LLVM. This is primarily done in [`rustc_codegen_llvm/debuginfo`][llvm_di], though
some type-name processing exists in [`rustc_codegen_ssa/debuginfo`][ssa_di]. Rust communicates to
LLVM via the `DIBuilder` API - a thin wrapper around LLVM's internals that exists in
[rustc_llvm][rustc_llvm].

[llvm_di]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/tree/main/compiler/rustc_codegen_llvm/src/debuginfo
[ssa_di]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/tree/main/compiler/rustc_codegen_ssa/src/debuginfo
[rustc_llvm]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/tree/main/compiler/rustc_llvm

# Type Information

Type information typically consists of the type name, size, alignment, as well as things like
fields, generic parameters, and storage modifiers if they are relevant. Much of this work happens in
[rustc_codegen_llvm/src/debuginfo/metadata][di_metadata].

[di_metadata]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/main/compiler/rustc_codegen_llvm/src/debuginfo/metadata.rs

It is important to keep in mind that the goal is not necessarily "represent types exactly how they
appear in Rust", rather it is to represent them in a way that allows debuggers to most accurately
reconstruct the data during debugging. This distinction is vital to understanding the core work that
occurs on this layer; many changes made here will be for the purpose of working around debugger
limitations when no other option will work.

## Quirks

Rust's generated DI nodes "pretend" to be C/C++ for both CDB and LLDB's sake. This can result in
some unintuitive and non-idiomatic debug info.

### Pointers and Reference

Wide pointers/references/`Box` are treated as a struct with 2 fields: `data_ptr` and `length`.

All non-wide pointers, references, and `Box` pointers are output as pointer nodes, and no
distinction is made between `mut` and non-`mut`. Several attempts have been made to rectify this,
but unfortunately there is not a straightforward solution. Using the `reference` DI nodes of the
respective formats has pitfalls. There is a semantic difference between C++ references and Rust
references that is unreconcilable.

>From [cppreference](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/reference.html):
>
>References are not objects; **they do not necessarily occupy storage**, although the compiler may
>allocate storage if it is necessary to implement the desired semantics (e.g. a non-static data
>member of reference type usually increases the size of the class by the amount necessary to store
>a memory address).
>
>Because references are not objects, **there are no arrays of references, no pointers to references, and no references to references**

The current proposed solution is to simply [typedef the pointer nodes][issue_144394].

[issue_144394]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/144394

Using the `const` qualifier to denote non-`mut` poses potential issues due to LLDB's internal
optimizations. In short, LLDB attempts to cache the child-values of variables (e.g. struct fields,
array elements) when stepping through code. A heuristic is used to determine which values are safely
cache-able, and `const` is part of that heuristic. Research has not been done into how this would
interact with things like Rust's interior mutability constructs.

### DWARF vs PDB

While most of the type information is fairly straight forward, one notable issue is the debug info
format of the target. Each format has different semantics and limitations, as such they require
slightly different debug info in some cases. This is gated by calls to
[`cpp_like_debuginfo`][cpp_like].

[cpp_like]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/main/compiler/rustc_codegen_ssa/src/debuginfo/type_names.rs#L813

### Naming

Rust attempts to communicate type names as accurately as possible, but debuggers and debug info
formats do not always respect that.

Due to limitations in MSVC's expression parser, the following name transformations are made for PDB
debug info:

| Rust name | MSVC name |
| --- | --- |
| `&str`/`&mut str` | `ref$<str$>`/`ref_mut$<str$>` |
| `&[T]`/`&mut [T]` | `ref$<slice$<T> >`/`ref_mut$<slice$<T> >`[^1] |
| `[T; N]` | `array$<T, N>` |
| `RustEnum` | `enum2$<RustEnum>` |
| `(T1, T2)` | `tuple$<T1, T2>`|
| `*const T` | `ptr_const$<T>` |
| `*mut T` | `ptr_mut$<T>` |
| `usize` | `size_t`[^2] |
| `isize` | `ptrdiff_t`[^2] |
| `uN` | `unsigned __intN`[^2] |
| `iN` | `__intN`[^2] |
| `f32` | `float`[^2] |
| `f64` | `double`[^2] |
| `f128` | `fp128`[^2] |

[^1]: MSVC's expression parser will treat `>>` as a right shift. It is necessary to separate
consecutive `>`'s with a space (`> >`) in type names.

[^2]: While these type names are generated as part of the debug info node (which is then wrapped in
a typedef node with the Rust name), once the LLVM-IR node is converted to a CodeView node, the type
name information is lost. This is because CodeView has special shorthand nodes for primitive types,
and those shorthand nodes to not have a "name" field.

### Generics

Rust outputs generic *type* information (`T` in `ArrayVec<T, N: usize>`), but not generic *value*
information (`N` in `ArrayVec<T, N: usize>`).

CodeView does not have a leaf node for generics/C++ templates, so all generic information is lost
when generating PDB debug info. There are workarounds that allow the debugger to retrieve the
generic arguments via the type name, but it is fragile solution at best. Efforts are being made to
contact Microsoft to correct this deficiency, and/or to use one of the unused CodeView node types as
a suitable equivalent.

### Type aliases

Rust outputs typedef nodes in several cases to help account for debugger limitiations, but it does
not currently output nodes for [type aliases in the source code][type_aliases].

[type_aliases]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/type-aliases.html

### Enums

Enum DI nodes are generated in [rustc_codegen_llvm/src/debuginfo/metadata/enums][di_metadata_enums]

[di_metadata_enums]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/tree/main/compiler/rustc_codegen_llvm/src/debuginfo/metadata/enums

#### DWARF

DWARF has a dedicated node for discriminated unions: `DW_TAG_variant`. It is a container that
references `DW_TAG_variant_part` nodes that may or may not contain a discriminant value. The
hierarchy looks as follows:

```txt
DW_TAG_structure_type      (top-level type for the coroutine)
  DW_TAG_variant_part      (variant part)
    DW_AT_discr            (reference to discriminant DW_TAG_member)
    DW_TAG_member          (discriminant member)
    DW_TAG_variant         (variant 1)
    DW_TAG_variant         (variant 2)
    DW_TAG_variant         (variant 3)
  DW_TAG_structure_type    (type of variant 1)
  DW_TAG_structure_type    (type of variant 2)
  DW_TAG_structure_type    (type of variant 3)
```

#### PDB
PDB does not have a dedicated node, so it generates the C equivalent of a discriminated union:

```c
union enum2$<RUST_ENUM_NAME> {
    enum VariantNames {
        First,
        Second
    };
    struct Variant0 {
        struct First {
            // fields
        };
        static const enum2$<RUST_ENUM_NAME>::VariantNames NAME;
        static const unsigned long DISCR_EXACT;
        enum2$<RUST_ENUM_NAME>::Variant0::First value;
    };
    struct Variant1 {
        struct Second {
            // fields
        };
        static enum2$<RUST_ENUM_NAME>::VariantNames NAME;
        static unsigned long DISCR_EXACT;
        enum2$<RUST_ENUM_NAME>::Variant1::Second value;
    };
    enum2$<RUST_ENUM_NAME>::Variant0 variant0;
    enum2$<RUST_ENUM_NAME>::Variant1 variant1;
    unsigned long tag;
}
```

An important note is that due to limitations in LLDB, the `DISCR_*` value generated is always a
`u64` even if the value is not `#[repr(u64)]`. This is largely a non-issue for LLDB because the
`DISCR_*` value and the `tag` are read into `uint64_t` values regardless of their type.

# Source Information

TODO

---

# (WIP) LLVM Codegen

When Rust calls an LLVM `DIBuilder` function, LLVM translates the given information to a
["debug record"][dbg_record] that is format-agnostic. These records can be inspected in the LLVM-IR.

[dbg_record]: https://llvm.org/docs/SourceLevelDebugging.html#debug-records

It is important to note that tags within the debug records are **always stored as DWARF tags**. If
the target calls for PDB debug info, during codegen the debug records will then be passed through
[a module that translates the DWARF tags to their CodeView counterparts][cv].

[cv]:https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/llvm/lib/CodeGen/AsmPrinter/CodeViewDebug.cpp

---

# Debugger Internals

It is the debugger's job to convert the debug info into an in-memory representation. Both the
interpretation of the debug info and the in-memory representation are arbitrary; anything will do
so long as meaningful information can be reconstructed while the program is running. The pipeline
from raw debug info to usable types can be quite complicated.

Once the information is in a workable format, the debugger front-end then must provide a way to
interpret and display the data, a way for users to interact with it, and an API for extensibility.

Debuggers are vast systems and cannot be covered completely here. This section will provide a brief
overview of the subsystems directly relevant to the Rust debugging experience.

Microsoft's debugging engine is closed source, so it will not be covered here.

---

# LLDB Internals

LLDB's debug info processing relies on a set of extensible interfaces largely defined in
[lldb/src/Plugins][lldb_plugins]. These are meant to allow third-party compiler developers to add
language support that is loaded at run-time by LLDB, but at time of writing (Nov 2025) the public
API has not been settled on, so plugins exist either in LLDB itself or in standalone forks of LLDB.

[lldb_plugins]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/main/lldb/source/Plugins

Typically, language support will be written as a pipeline of these plugins: `*ASTParser` ->
`TypeSystem` -> `ExpressionParser`/`Language`.

Here are some existing implementations of LLDB's plugin API:

* [Apple's fork with support for Swift](https://github.com/swiftlang/llvm-project)
* [CodeLLDB's former fork with support for Rust](https://archive.softwareheritage.org/browse/origin/directory/?branch=refs/heads/codelldb/16.x&origin_url=https://github.com/vadimcn/llvm-project&path=lldb/source/Plugins/TypeSystem/Rust&timestamp=2023-09-11T04:55:10Z)
* [A work in progress reimplementation of Rust support](https://github.com/Walnut356/llvm-project/tree/lldbrust/19.x)
* [A Rust expression parser plugin](https://github.com/tromey/lldb/tree/a0fc10ce0dacb3038b7302fff9f6cb8cb34b37c6/source/Plugins/ExpressionParser/Rust).
This was written before the `TypeSystem` API was created. Due to the freeform nature of expression parsing, the
underlyng lexing, parsing, function calling, etc. should still offer valuable insights.

## Rust Support and TypeSystemClang

As mentioned in the debug info overview, LLDB has partial Rust support. To further clarify, Rust
uses the plugin-pipeline that was built for C/C++ (though it contains some helpers for Rust enum
types), which relies directly on the `clang` compiler's representation of types. This imposes heavy
restrictions on how much we can change when LLDB's output doesn't match what we want. Some
workarounds can help, but at the end of the day Rust's needs are secondary compared to making sure
C and C++ compilation and debugging work correctly.

LLDB is receptive to adding a `TypeSystemRust`, but it is a massive undertaking. This section serves
to not only document how we currently interact with [`TypeSystemClang`][ts_clang], but also as light
guidance on implementing a `TypeSystemRust` in the future.

[ts_clang]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/main/lldb/source/Plugins/TypeSystem/Clang

It is worth noting that a `TypeSystem` directly interacting with the target language's compiler is
the intention, but it is not a requirement. One can create all the necessary supporting types within
their plugin implementation.

> Note: LLDB's documentation, including comments in the source code, is pretty sparse. Trying to
> understand how language support works by reading `TypeSystemClang`'s implementation is somewhat
> difficult due to the added requirement of understanding the `clang` compiler's internals. It is
> recommended to look at the 2 `TypeSystemRust` implementations listed above, as they are written
> "from scratch" without leveraging a compiler's type representation. They are relatively close to
> the minimum necessary to implement language support.

## DWARF vs PDB

LLDB is unique in being able to handle both DWARF and PDB debug information. This does come with
some added complexity. To complicate matters further, PDB support is split between `dia`, which
relies on the `msdia140.dll` library distributed with Visual Studio, and `native`, which is written
from scratch using publicly available information about the PDB format.

> Note: `dia` was the default up to LLDB version 21. `native` is the new default as of
> LLDB 22's release. There are plans to deprecate and completely remove the `dia`-based plugins. As
> such, only `native` parsing will be discussed below. For progress, please see
> [this discourse thread][dia_discourse] and the relevant [tracking issue][dia_tracking].
>
> `native` can be toggled via the `plugin.symbol-file.pdb.reader` setting added in LLDB 22 or using
> the environment variable `LLDB_USE_NATIVE_PDB_READER=0/1`

[dia_discourse]: https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-removing-the-dia-pdb-plugin-from-lldb/87827
[dia_tracking]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/114906

## Debug Node Parsing

The first step is to process the raw debug nodes into something usable. This primarily occurs in
the [`DWARFASTParser`][dwarf_ast] and [`PdbAstBuilder`][pdb_ast] classes. These classes are fed a
deserialized form of the debug info generated from [`SymbolFileDWARF`][sf_dwarf] and
[`SymbolFileNativePDB`][sf_pdb] respectively. The `SymbolFile` implementers make almost no
transformations to the underlying debug info before passing it to the parsers. For both PDB and
DWARF, the debug info is read using LLVM's debug info handlers.

[dwarf_ast]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/main/lldb/source/Plugins/SymbolFile/DWARF
[pdb_ast]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/main/lldb/source/Plugins/SymbolFile/NativePDB
[sf_dwarf]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/lldb/source/Plugins/SymbolFile/DWARF/SymbolFileDWARF.h
[sf_pdb]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/lldb/source/Plugins/SymbolFile/NativePDB/SymbolFileNativePDB.h

The parsers translate the nodes into more convenient formats for LLDB's purposes. For `clang`, these
formats are `clang::QualType`, `clang::Decl`, and `clang::DeclContext`, which are the types `clang`
uses internally when compiling C and C++. Again, using the compiler's representation of types is not a
requirement, but the plugin system was built with it as a possibility.

> Note: The above types will be referred to language-agnostically as `LangType`, `Decl`, and
`DeclContext` when the specific implementation details of `TypeSystemClang` are not relevant.

`LangType` represents a type. This includes information such as the name of the type, the size and
alignment, its classification (e.g. struct, primitive, pointer), its qualifiers (e.g.
`const`, `volatile`), template arguments, function argument and return types, etc. [Here][rust_type]
is an example of what a `RustType` might look like.

[rust_type]: https://github.com/Walnut356/llvm-project/blob/13bcfd502452606d69faeea76aec3a06db554af9/lldb/source/Plugins/TypeSystem/Rust/TypeSystemRust.h#L618

`Decl` represents any kind of declaration. It could be a type, a variable, a static field of a
struct, the value that a static or const is initialized with, etc.

`DeclContext` more or less represents a scope. `DeclContext`s typically contain `Decl`s and other
`DeclContexts`, though the relationship isn't that straight forward. For example, a function can be
both a `Decl` (because function signatures are types), **and** a `DeclContext` (because functions
contain variable declarations, nested functions declarations, etc.).

The translation process can be quite verbose, but is usually straightforward. Much of the work here
is dependant on the exact information needed to fill out `LangType`, `Decl`, and `DeclContext`.

Once a node is translated, a pointer to it is type-erased (`void*`) and wrapped in `CompilerType`,
`CompilerDecl`, or `CompilerDeclContext`. These wrappers associate the them with the `TypeSystem`
that owns them. Methods on these objects delegates to the `TypeSystem`, which casts the `void*` back
to the appropriate `LangType*`/`Decl*`/`DeclContext*` and operates on the internals. In Rust terms,
the relationship looks something like this:

```Rust
struct CompilerType {
    inner_type: *mut c_void,
    type_system: Arc<dyn TypeSystem>,
}

impl CompilerType {
    pub fn get_byte_size(&self) -> usize {
        self.type_system.get_byte_size(self.lang_type)
    }

}

...

impl TypeSystem for TypeSystemLang {
    pub fn get_byte_size(lang_type: *mut c_void) -> usize {
        let lang_type = lang_type as *mut LangType;

        // Operate on the internals of the LangType to
        // determine its size
        ...
    }
}
```

## Type Systems

The [`TypeSystem` interface][ts_interface] has 3 major purposes:

[ts_interface]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/lldb/include/lldb/Symbol/TypeSystem.h#L69

1. Act as the "sole authority" of a language's types. This allows the type system to be added to
LLDB's "pool" of type systems. When an executable is loaded, the target language is determined, and
the pool is queried to find a `TypeSystem` that claims it can handle the language. One can also use
the `TypeSystem` to retrieve the backing `SymbolFile`, search for types, and synthesize basic types
that might not exist in the debug info (e.g. primitives, arrays-of-`T`, pointers-to-`T`).
2. Manage the lifetimes of the `LangType`, `Decl`, and `DeclContext` objects
3. Customize the "defaults" of how those types appear and how they can be interacted with.

The first two functions are pretty straightforward so we will focus on the third.

Many of the functions in the `TypeSystem` interface will look familiar if you have worked with the
visualizer scripts. These functions underpin `SBType` the `SBValue` functions with matching names.
For example, `TypeSystem::GetFormat` returns the default format for the type if no custom formatter
has been applied to it.

Of particular note are `GetIndexOfChildWithName` and `GetNumChildren`. The `TypeSystem` versions of
these functions operate on a *type*, not a value like the `SBValue` versions. The values returned
from the `TypeSystem` functions dictate what parts of the struct can be interacted with *at all* by
the rest of LLDB. If a field is ommitted, that field effectively no longer exists to LLDB.

Additionally, since they do not work with objects, there is no underlying memory to inspect or
interpret. Essentially, this means these functions do not have the same purpose as their equivalent
`SyntheticProvider` functions. There is no way to determine how many elements a `Vec` has or what
address those elements live at. It is also not possible to determine the value of the discriminant
of a sum-type.

Ideally, the `TypeSystem` should expose types as they appear in the debug info with as few
alterations as possible. LLDB's synthetics and frontend can handle making the type pretty. If some
piece of information is useless, the Rust compiler should be altered to not output that debug info
in the first place.

## Expression Parsing

The `TypeSystem` is typically written to have a counterpart that can handle expression parsing. It
requires implementing a few extra functions in the `TypeSystem` interface. The bulk of the
expression parsing code should live in [lldb/source/Plugins/ExpressionParser][expr].

[expr]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/main/lldb/source/Plugins/ExpressionParser

There isn't too much of note about the parser. It requires implementing a simple interpreter that
can handle (possibly simplified) Rust syntax. They operate on `lldb::ValueObject`s, which are the
objects that underpin `SBValue`.

## Language

The [`Language` plugins][lang_plugin] are the C++ equivalent to the Python visualizer scripts. They
operate on `SBValue` objects for the same purpose: creating synthetic children and pretty-printing.
The [CPlusPlusLanguage's implementations][cpp_lang] for the LibCxx types are great resources to
learn how visualizers should be written.

[lang_plugin]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/main/lldb/source/Plugins/Language
[cpp_lang]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/main/lldb/source/Plugins/Language/CPlusPlus

These plugins can access LLDB's private internals (including the underlying `TypeSystem`), so
synthetic/summary providers written as a `Language` plugin can provide higher quality output than
their python equivalent.

While debug node parsing, type systems, and expression parsing are all closely tied to eachother,
the `Language` plugin is encapsulated more and thus can be written "standalone" for any language
that an existing type system supports. Due to the lower barrier of entry, a `RustLanguage` plugin
may be a good stepping stone towards full language support in LLDB.

## Visualizers

WIP

---

# (WIP) GDB Internals

GDB's Rust support lives at `gdb/rust-lang.h` and `gdb/rust-lang.c`. The expression parsing support
can be found in `gdb/rust-exp.h` and `gdb/rust-parse.c`

---

# Debugger Visualizers

These are typically the last step before the debugger displays the information, but the results may
be piped through a debug adapter such as an IDE's debugger API.

The term "Visualizer" is a bit of a misnomer. The real goal isn't just to prettify the output, but
to provide an interface for the user to interact with that is as useful as possible. In many cases
this means reconstructing the original type as closely as possible to its Rust representation, but
not always.

The visualizer interface allows generating "synthetic children" - fields that don't exist in the
debug info, but can be derived from invariants about the language and the type itself. A simple
example is allowing one to interact with the elements of a `Vec<T>` instead of just it's `*mut u8`
heap pointer, length, and capacity.

## `rust-lldb`, `rust-gdb`, and `rust-windbg.cmd`

These support scripts are distributed with Rust toolchains. They locate the appropriate debugger and
the toolchain's visualizer scripts, then launch the debugger with the appropriate arguments to load
the visualizer scripts before a debugee is launched/attached to.

## `#![debugger_visualizer]`

[This attribute][dbg_vis_attr] allows Rust library authors to include pretty printers for their
types within the library itself. These pretty printers are of the same format as typical
visualizers, but are embedded directly into the compiled binary. These scripts are loaded
automatically by the debugger, allowing a seamless experience for users. This attribute currently
works for GDB and natvis scripts.

[dbg_vis_attr]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/attributes/debugger.html#the-debugger_visualizer-attribute

GDB python scripts are embedded in the `.debug_gdb_scripts` section of the binary. More information
can be found [here](https://sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb.html/dotdebug_005fgdb_005fscripts-section.html). Rustc accomplishes this in [`rustc_codegen_llvm/src/debuginfo/gdb.rs`][gdb_rs]

[gdb_rs]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/main/compiler/rustc_codegen_llvm/src/debuginfo/gdb.rs

Natvis files can be embedded in the PDB debug info using the [`/NATVIS` linker option][linker_opt],
and have the [highest priority][priority] when a type is resolving which visualizer to use. The
files specified by the attribute are collected into
[`CrateInfo::natvis_debugger_visualizers`][natvis] which are then added as linker arguments in
[`rustc_codegen_ssa/src/back/linker.rs`][linker_rs]

[linker_opt]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/reference/natvis-add-natvis-to-pdb?view=msvc-170
[priority]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/debugger/create-custom-views-of-native-objects?view=visualstudio#BKMK_natvis_location
[natvis]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/e0e204f3e97ad5f79524b9c259dc38df606ed82c/compiler/rustc_codegen_ssa/src/lib.rs#L212
[linker_rs]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/main/compiler/rustc_codegen_ssa/src/back/linker.rs#L1106

LLDB is not currently supported, but there are a few methods that could potentially allow support in
the future. Officially, the intended method is via a [formatter bytecode][bytecode]. This was
created to offer a comparable experience to GDB's, but without  the safety concerns associated with
embedding an entire python script. The opcodes are limited, but it works with `SBValue` and `SBType`
in roughly the same way as python visualizer scripts. Implementing this would require writing some
sort of DSL/mini compiler.

[bytecode]: https://lldb.llvm.org/resources/formatterbytecode.html

Alternatively, it might be possible to copy GDB's strategy entirely: create a bespoke section in the
binary and embed a python script in it. LLDB will not load it automatically, but the python API does
allow one to access the [raw sections of the debug info][SBSection]. With this, it may be possible
to extract the python script from our bespoke section and then load it in during the startup of
Rust's visualizer scripts.

[SBSection]: https://lldb.llvm.org/python_api/lldb.SBSection.html#sbsection

## Performance

Before tackling the visualizers themselves, it's important to note that these are part of a
performance-sensitive system. Please excuse the break in formality, but: if I have to spend
significant time debugging, I'm annoyed. If I have to *wait on my debugger*, I'm pissed.

Every millisecond spent in these visualizers is a millisecond longer for the user to see output.
This can be especially painful for large stackframes that contain many/large container types.
Debugger GUI's such as VSCode will request the whole stack frame at once, and this can result in
delays of tens of seconds (or even minutes) before being able to interact with any variables in the
frame.

There is a tendancy to balk at the idea of optimizing Python code, but it really can have a
substantial impact. Remember, there is no compiler to help keep the code fast. Even simple
transformations are not done for you. It can be difficult to find Python performance tips through
all the noise of people suggesting you don't bother optimizing Python, so here are some things to
keep in mind that are relevant to these scripts:

* Everything allocates, even `int`
* Use tuples when possible. `list` is effectively `Vec<Box<[Any]>>`, whereas tuples are equivalent
to `Box<[Any]>`. They have one less layer of indirection, don't carry extra capacity and can't
grow/shrink which can be advantageous in many cases. An additional benefit is that Python caches and
recycles the underlying allocations of all tuples up to size 20.
* Regexes are slow and should be avoided when simple string manipulation will do
* Strings are immutable, thus many string operations implictly copy the contents.
* When concatenating large lists of strings, `"".join(iterable_of_strings)` is typically the fastest
way to do it.
* f-strings are generally the fastest way to do small, simple string transformations such as
surrounding a string with parentheses.
* The act of calling a function is somewhat slow (even if the function is completely empty). If the
code section is very hot, consider inlining the function manually.
* Local variable access is significantly faster than global and built-in function access
* Member/method access via the `.` operator is also slow, consider reassigning deeply nested values
to local variables to avoid this cost (e.g. `h = a.b.c.d.e.f.g.h`).
* Accessing inherited methods and fields is about 2x slower than base-class methods and fields.
Avoid inheritance whenever possible.
* Use [`__slots__`](https://wiki.python.org/moin/UsingSlots) wherever possible. `__slots__` is a way
to indicate to Python that your class's fields won't change and speeds up field access by a
noticable amount. This does require you to name your fields in advance and initialize them in
`__init__`, but it's a small price to pay for the benefits.
* Match statements/if..elif..else are not optimized in any way. The conditions are checked in order,
1 by 1. If possible, use an alternative such as dictionary dispatch or a table of values
* Compute lazily when possible
* List comprehensions are typically faster than loops, generator comprehensions are a bit slower
than list comprehensions, but use less memory. You can think of comprehensions as equivalent to
Rust's `iter.map()`. List comprehensions effectively call `collect::<Vec<_>>` at the end, whereas
generator comprehensions do not.

---

# LLDB - Python Providers

> NOTE: LLDB's C++<->Python FFI expects a version of Python designated at the time LLDB was
>compiled. LLDB is careful to correspond this version to the minimum in typical Linux and macOS
>distributions, but on Windows there is no easy solution. If you receive an import error regarding
>`_lldb` not existing, a mismatched Python version is likely the cause.
>
> LLDB is considering solutions this issue. For updates, see
>[this discussion][minimal_python_install] and [this github issue][issue_167001]

[minimal_python_install]: https://discourse.llvm.org/t/a-minimal-python-install-for-lldb/88658
[issue_167001]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/167001

> NOTE: As of <!-- date-check --> Nov 2025,
> LLDB's minimum supported Python version is 3.8, with plans to update it to
> 3.9 or 3.10, depending on several outside factors. Scripts should ideally be written with only the
> features available in the minimum supported Python version. Please see [this discussion][mrpv] for
> more info.

[mrpv]: https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-upgrading-llvm-s-minimum-required-python-version/88605/

> NOTE: The path to LLDB's Python package can be located via the CLI command `lldb -P`

LLDB provides 3 mechanisms for customizing output:

* Formats
* Synthetic providers
* Summary providers

## Formats

The official documentation is [here](https://lldb.llvm.org/use/variable.html#type-format).
In short,
formats allow one to set the default print format for primitive types (e.g. print `25u8` as decimal
`25`, hex `0x19`, or binary `00011001`).

Rust will almost always need to override `unsigned char`, `signed char`, `char`, `u8`, and `i8`, to
(unsigned) decimal format.

## Synthetic Providers

The official documentation is [here](https://lldb.llvm.org/use/variable.html#synthetic-children),
but some information is vague, outdated, or entirely missing.

Nearly all interaction the user has with variables will be through LLDB's
[`SBValue` objects][sbvalue] which are used both in the Python API, and internally via LLDB's
plugins and CLI.

[sbvalue]: https://lldb.llvm.org/python_api/lldb.SBValue.html

A Synthetic Provider is a Python class, written with a specific interface, that is associated with
one or more Rust types.
The Synthetic Provider wraps `SBValue` objects and LLDB will call our
class's functions when inspecting the variable.

The wrapped value is still an `SBValue`, but when calling e.g. `SBValue.GetChildAtIndex`, it will
internally call `SyntheticProvider.get_child_at_index`.
You can check if a value has a synthetic
provider via `SBValue.IsSynthetic()`, and which synthetic it is via `SBValue.GetTypeSynthetic()`.
If you want to interact with the underlying non-synthetic value, you can call
`SBValue.GetNonSyntheticValue()`.


The expected interface is as follows:

```python
class SyntheticProvider:
    def __init__(self, valobj: SBValue, _lldb_internal): ...

    # optional
    def update(self) -> bool: ...

    # optional
    def has_children(self) -> bool: ...

    # optional
    def num_children(self, max_children: int) -> int: ...

    def get_child_index(self, name: str) -> int: ...

    def get_child_at_index(self, index: int) -> SBValue: ...

    # optional
    def get_type_name(self) -> str: ...

    # optional
    def get_value(self) -> SBValue: ...
```

Below are explanations of the methods, their quirks, and how they should generally be used.
If a method overrides an `SBValue` method, that method will be listed.

### `__init__`

This function is called once per object, and must store the `valobj` in the Python class so that it
is accessible elsewhere.
Very little else should be done here.

### (optional) `update`

This function is called prior to LLDB interacting with a variable, but after `__init__`.
LLDB tracks whether `update` has already been called.
If it has been, and if it is not possible for the variable
to have changed (e.g. inspecting the same variable a second time without stepping), it will omit the
call to `update`.

This function has 2 purposes:

* Store/update any information that may have changed since the last time `update` was run
* Inform LLDB if there were changes to the children such that it should flush the child cache.

Typical operations include storing the heap pointer, length, capacity, and element type of a `Vec`,
determining an enum variable's variant, or checking which slots of a `HashMap` are occupied.

The bool returned from this function is somewhat complicated, see:
[`update` caching](#update-caching) below for more info.
When in doubt, return `False`/`None`.
As of <!-- date-check --> Nov 2025,
none of the visualizers return `True`, but that may change as the debug info
test suite is improved.

#### `update` caching

LLDB attempts to cache values when possible, including child values.
This cache is effectively the
number of child objects, and the addresses of the underlying debugee memory that the child object
represents.
By returning `True`, you indicate to LLDB that the number of children and the addresses
of those children have not changed since the last time `update` was run, meaning it can reuse the
cached children.

**Returning `True` in the wrong circumstances will result in the debugger outputting incorrect
information**.

Returning `False` indicates that there have been changes, the cache will be flushed, and the
children will be fetched from scratch.
It is the safer option if you are unsure.

The only relationship that matters is parent-to-child.
Grandchildren depend on the `update` function of their direct parent, not that of the grandparent.

It is important to view the child cache as pointers-to-memory.
For example, if a slice's `data_ptr`
value and `length` have not changed, returning `True` is appropriate.
Even if the slice is mutable
and elements of it are overwritten (e.g. `slice[0] = 15`), because the child cache consists of
*pointers*, they will reflect the new data at that memory location.

Conversely, if `data_ptr` has changed, that means it is pointing to a new location in memory, the
child pointers are invalid, and the cache must be flushed.
If the `length` has changed, we need to flush the cache to reflect the new number of children.
If `length` has changed but `data_ptr` has
not, it is possible to store the old children in the `SyntheticProvider` itself (e.g.
`list[SBValue]`) and dole those out rather than generating them from scratch, only creating new
children if they do not already exist in the `SyntheticProvider`'s list.

For further clarification, see [this discussion](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/when-is-it-safe-to-cache-syntheticprovider-update/88608)

> NOTE: when testing the caching behavior, do not rely on LLDB's heuristic to persist variables when
> stepping. Instead, store the variable in a Python object (e.g. `v = lldb.frame.var("var_name")`),
> step forward, and then inspect the stored variable.

### (optional) `has_children`

> Overrides `SBValue.MightHaveChildren`

This is a shortcut used by LLDB to check if the value has children *at all*, without doing
potentially expensive computations to determine how many children there are (e.g. linked list).
Often, this will be a one-liner of `return True`/`return False` or
`return self.valobj.MightHaveChildren()`.

### (optional) `num_children`

> Overrides `SBValue.GetNumChildren`

Returns the total number of children that LLDB should try to access when printing the type.
This number **does not** need to match to total number of synthetic children.

The `max_children` argument can be returned if calculating the number of children can be expensive
(e.g. linked list). If this is not a consideration, `max_children` can be omitted from the function
signature.

Additionally, fields can be intentionally "hidden" from LLDB while still being accessible to the
user.
For example, one might want a `vec![1, 2, 3]` to display only its elements, but still have the
`len` and `capacity` values accessible on request.
By returning `3` from `num_children`, one can
restrict LLDB to only displaying `[1, 2, 3]`, while users can still directly access `v.len` and
`v.capacity`.
See: [Example Provider: Vec\<T\>](#example-provider-vect) to see an implementation of this.

### `get_child_index`

> Overrides `SBValue.GetIndexOfChildWithName`
>
> Affects `SBValue.GetChildMemberWithName`

Given a name, returns the index that the child should be accessed at.
It is expected that the return value of this function is passed directly to `get_child_at_index`.
As with `num_children`, the
values returned here *can* be arbitrary, so long as they are properly coordinated with
`get_child_at_index`.

One special value is `$$dereference$$`.
Accounting for this pseudo-field will allow LLDB to use the
`SBValue` returned from `get_child_at_index` as the result of a dereference via LLDB's expression
parser (e.g. `*val` and `val->field`)

### `get_child_at_index`

> Overrides `SBValue.GetChildAtIndex`

Given an index, returns a child `SBValue`.
Often these are generated via
`SBValue.CreateValueFromAddress`, but less commonly `SBValue.CreateChildAtOffset`,
`SBValue.CreateValueFromExpression`, and `SBValue.CreateValueFromData`.
These functions can be a
little finicky, so you may need to fiddle with them to get the output you want.

In some cases, `SBValue.Clone` is appropriate.
It creates a new child that is an exact copy of an existing child, but with a new name.
This is useful for cases like tuples, which have field names of
the style `__0`, `__1`, ... when we would prefer they were named `0`, `1`, ...

Small alterations can be made to the resulting child before it is returned.
This is useful for `&str`/`String`, where we would prefer if the children were displayed as
`lldb.eFormatBytesWithASCII` rather than just as a decimal value.

### (optional) `get_type_name`

> Overrides `SBValue.GetDisplayTypeName`

Overrides the displayed name of a type.
For a synthetic `SBValue` whose type name is overridden, the
original type name can still be retrieved via `SBValue.GetTypeName()` and
`SBValue.GetType().GetName()`

This can be helpful in shortening the name of common standard library types (e.g.
`std::collections::hash::map::HashMap<K, V, std::hash::random::RandomState>` -> `HashMap<K, V>`), or
in normalizing MSVC type names (e.g. `ref$<str$>` -> `&str`).

The string manipulation can be a little tricky, especially on MSVC where we cannot conveniently
access the generic parameters of the type.

### (optional) `get_value`

> Overrides `SBValue.GetValue()`, `SBValue.GetValueAsUnsigned()`, `SBValue.GetValueAsSigned()`,
>`SBValue.GetValueAsAddress()`,

The `SBValue` returned is expected to be a primitive type or pointer, and is treated as the value of
the variable in expressions.

> IMPORTANT: The `SBValue` returned **must be stored in the `SyntheticProvider`**.
> As of <!-- date-check --> Nov 2025,
> there is a bug where if the `SBValue` is acquired within `get_value` and not stored
> anywhere, Python will segfault when LLDB attempts to access the value.

## Summary Providers

Summary providers are Python functions of the following form:

```python
def SummaryProvider(valobj: SBValue, _lldb_internal) -> str: ...
```

Where the returned string is passed verbatim to the user.
If the returned value isn't a string, it
is naively convered to a string (e.g. `return None` prints `"None"`, not an empty string).

If the `SBValue` passed in is of a type that has a Synthetic Provider, `valobj.IsSynthetic()` will
return `True`, and the synthetic's corresponding functions will be used.
If this is undesirable, the original value can be retrieved via `valobj.GetNonSyntheticValue()`.
This can be helpful in cases
like `String`, where individually calling `GetChildAtIndex` in a loop is much slower than accessing
the heap pointer, reading the whole byte array directly from the debugee's memory, and using
Python's `bytes.decode()`.

### Instance Summaries

Regular `SummaryProvider` functions take an opaque `SBValue`.
That `SBValue` will reflect the type's
`SyntheticProvider` if one exists, but we cannot access the `SyntheticProvider` instance itself, or
any of its internal implementation details.
This is deterimental in cases where we need some of
those internal details to help complete the summary.
As of <!-- date-check --> Nov 2025, in the synthetic we just
run the non-synthetic value through the synthetic provider
(`synth = SyntheticProvider(valobj.GetNonSyntheticValue(), _dict)`), but this is obviously
suboptimal and there are plans to use the method outlined below.

Instead, we can leverage the Python module's state to allow for instance summaries.
Prior art for
this technique exists in the [old CodeLLDB Rust visualizer scripts](https://github.com/vadimcn/codelldb/blob/cf9574977b80e29c6de2c44d12f1071a53a54caf/formatters/rust.py#L110).

In short: every Synthetic Provider's `__init__` function stores a unique ID and a weak reference to
`self` in a global dictionary.
The Synthetic Provider class also implements a `get_summary` function.
The type's `SummaryProvider` is a function that looks up the unique ID in this dictionary,
then calls a `get_summary` on the instance it retrieves.

```python
import weakref

SYNTH_BY_ID = weakref.WeakValueDictionary()

class SyntheticProvider:
    valobj: SBValue

    # slots requires opting-in to __weakref__
    __slots__ = ("valobj", "__weakref__")

    def __init__(valobj: SBValue, _dict):
        SYNTH_BY_ID[valobj.GetID()] = self
        self.valobj = valobj

    def get_summary(self) -> str:
        ...

def InstanceSummaryProvider(valobj: SBValue, _dict) -> str:
    # GetNonSyntheticValue should never fail as InstanceSummaryProvider implies an instance of a
    # `SyntheticProvider`. No non-synthetic types should ever have this summary assigned to them
    # We use GetNonSyntheticValue because the synthetic vaobj has its own unique ID
    return SYNTH_BY_ID[valobj.GetNonSyntheticValue().GetID()].get_summary()
```

For example, one might use this for the Enum synthetic provider.
The summary would like to access
the variant name, but there isn't a convenient way to reflect this via the type name or child-values
of the synthetic.
By implementing an instance summary, we can retrieve the variant name via
`self.variant.GetTypeName()` and some string manipulation.

# Writing Visualizer Scripts

> IMPORTANT: Unlike GDB and CDB, LLDB can debug executables with either DWARF or PDB debug info.
>Visualizers must be written to account for both formats whenever possible. See:
>[rust-codegen](./rust-codegen.md#dwarf-vs-pdb) for an overview of the differences

Scripts are injected into LLDB via the CLI command `command script import <path-to-script>.py`.
Once
injected, classes and functions can be added to the synthetic/summary pool with `type synthetic add`
and `type summary add` respectively.
The summaries and synthetics can be associated with a
"category", which is typically named after the language the providers are intended for.
The category we use will be called `Rust`.

> TIP: all LLDB commands can be prefixed with `help` (e.g. `help type synthetic add`) for a brief
description, list of arguments, and examples.

As of <!-- date-check --> Nov 2025,
we use `command source ...`, which executes a series of CLI commands from the
file [`lldb_commands`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/main/src/etc/lldb_commands) to add
providers.
This file is somewhat unwieldy, and will soon be supplanted by the Python API equivalent
outlined below.

## `__lldb_init_module`

This is an optional function of the form:

```python
def __lldb_init_module(debugger: SBDebugger, _lldb_internal) -> None: ...
```

This function is called at the end of `command script import ...`, but before control returns back
to the CLI.
It allows the script to initialize its own state.

Crucially, it is passed a reference to the debugger itself.
This allows us to create the `Rust` category and add providers to it.
It can also allow us to conditionally change which providers we
use depending on what version of LLDB the script detects.
This is vital for backwards compatibility
once we begin using recognizer functions, as recognizers were added in lldb 19.0.

## Visualizer Resolution

The order that visualizers resolve in is listed [here][formatters_101].
In short:

[formatters_101]: https://lldb.llvm.org/use/variable.html#finding-formatters-101

* If there is an exact match (non-regex name, recognizer function, or type already matched to
provider), use that
* If the object is a pointer/reference, try to use the dereferenced type's formatter
* If the object is a typedef, check the underlying type for a formatter
* If none of the above work, iterate through the regex type matchers

Within each of those steps, **iteration is done backwards** to allow new commands to "override" old
commands.
This is important for cases like `Box<str>` vs `Box<T>`, were we want a specialized
synthetic for the former, but a more generalized synthetic for the latter.

## Minutiae

LLDB's API is very powerful, but there are some "gotchas" and unintuitive behavior, some of which
will be outlined below.
The Python implementation can be viewed at the path returned by the CLI
command `lldb -P` in `lldb\__init__.py`.
In addition to the
[examples in the lldb repo][synth_examples], there are also [C++ visualizers][plugin_cpp] that can
be used as a reference (e.g. [LibCxxVector, the equivalent to `Vec<T>`][cxx_vector]). While C++'s
visualizers are written in C++ and have access to LLDB's internals, the API and general practices
are very similar.

[synth_examples]:https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/main/lldb/examples/synthetic
[plugin_cpp]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/main/lldb/source/Plugins/Language/CPlusPlus
[cxx_vector]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/lldb/source/Plugins/Language/CPlusPlus/LibCxxVector.cpp

### `SBValue`

* Pointer/reference `SBValue`s will effectively "auto-deref" in some cases, acting as if the
children of the pointed-to-object are its own children.
* The non-function fields are typically [`property()`][property] fields that point directly to the
function anyway (e.g. `SBValue.type = property(GetType, None)`). Accessing through these shorthands
is a bit slower to access than just calling the function directly, so they should be avoided.
Some
of the properties return special objects with special properties (e.g. `SBValue.member` returns an
object that acts like `dict[str, SBValue]` to access children).
Internally, many of these special
objects just allocate a new class instance and call the function on the `SBValue` anyway, resulting
in additional performance loss (e.g. `SBValue.member` internally just implements `__getitem__` which
is the one-liner `return self.valobj.GetChildMemberWithName(name)`)
* `SBValue.GetID` returns a unique `int` for each value for the duration of the debug session.
Synthetic `SBValue`'s have a different ID than their underlying `SBValue`.
The underlying ID can be retrieved via `SBValue.GetNonSyntheticValue().GetID()`.
* When manually calculating an address, `SBValue.GetValueAsAddress` should be preferred over
`SBValue.GetValueAsUnsigned` due to [target-specific behavior][get_address]
* Getting a string representation of an `SBValue` can be tricky because `GetSummary` requires a
summary provider and `GetValue` requires the type be representable by a primitive.
In almost all
cases where neither of those conditions are met, the type is a user defined struct that can be
passed through `StructSummaryProvider`.

[property]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#property
[get_address]: https://lldb.llvm.org/python_api/lldb.SBValue.html#lldb.SBValue.GetValueAsAddress

### `SBType`

* "Aggregate type" means a non-primitive struct/class/union
* "Template" is equivalent to "Generic"
* Types can be looked up by their name via `SBTarget.FindFirstType(type_name)`.
  `SBTarget` can be acquired via `SBValue.GetTarget`
* `SBType.template_args` returns `None` instead of an empty list if the type has no generics
* It is sometimes necessary to transform a type into the type you want via functions like
`SBType.GetArrayType` and `SBType.GetPointerType`.
These functions cannot fail.
They ask the underlying LLDB `TypeSystem` plugin for the type, bypassing the debug info completely.
Even if the
type does not exist in the debug info at all, these functions can create the appropriate type.
* `SBType.GetCanonicalType` is effectively `SBType.GetTypedefedType` + `SBType.GetUnqualifiedType`.
Unlike `SBType.GetTypedefedType`, it will always return a valid `SBType` regardless of whether or
not the original `SBType` is a typedef.
* `SBType.GetStaticFieldWithName` was added in LLDB 18. Unfortunately, backwards compatibility isn't
always possible since the static fields are otherwise completely inaccessible.


# Example Provider: `Vec<T>`

## SyntheticProvider

We start with the typical prelude, using `__slots__` since we have known fields.
In addition to the
object itself, we also need to store the type of the elements because `Vec`'s heap pointer is a
`*mut u8`, not a `*mut T`.
Rust is a statically typed language, so the type of `T` will never change.
That means we can store it during initialization.
The heap pointer, length, and capacity *can* change though, and thus are default initialized here.

```python
import lldb

class VecSyntheticProvider:
    valobj: SBValue
    data_ptr: SBValue
    len: int
    cap: int
    element_type: SBType

    __slots__ = (
        "valobj",
        "data_ptr",
        "len",
        "cap",
        "element_type",
        "__weakref__",
    )

    def __init__(valobj: SBValue, _dict) -> None:
        self.valobj = valobj
        # invalid type is a better default than `None`
        self.element_type = SBType()

        # special handling to account for DWARF/PDB differences
        if (arg := valobj.GetType().GetTemplateArgumentType(0)):
            self.element_type = arg
        else:
            arg_name = next(get_template_args(valobj.GetTypeName()))
            self.element_type = resolve_msvc_template_arg(arg_name, valobj.GetTarget())
```

For the implementation of `get_template_args` and `resolve_msvc_template_arg`, please see:
[`lldb_providers.py`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/main/src/etc/lldb_providers.py#L136).

Next, the update function.
We check if the pointer or length have changed.
We can ommit checking the
capacity, as the number of children will remain the same unless `len` changes.
If changing the capacity resulted in a reallocation, `data_ptr`'s address would be different.

If `data_ptr` and `length` haven't changed, we can take advantage of LLDB's caching and return
early.
If they have changed, we store the new values and tell LLDB to flush the cache.

```python
def update(self):
    ptr = self.valobj.GetChildMemberWithName("data_ptr")
    len = self.valobj.GetChildMemberWithName("length").GetValueAsUnsigned()

    if (
        self.data_ptr.GetValueAsAddress() == ptr.GetValueAsAddress()
        and self.len == len
    ):
        # Our child address offsets and child count are still valid
        # so we can reuse cached children
        return True

    self.data_ptr = ptr
    self.len = len

    return False
```

`has_children` and `num_children` are both straightforward:

```python
def has_children(self) -> bool:
    return True

def num_children(self) -> int:
    return self.len
```

When accessing elements, we expect values of the format `[0]`, `[1]`, etc. to mimic indexing.
Additionally, we still want the user to be able to quickly access the length and capacity, as they
can be very useful when debugging.
We assign these values `u32::MAX - 1` and `u32::MAX - 2`
respectively, as we can almost surely guarantee that they will not overlap with element values.
Note that we can account for both the full and shorthand `capacity` name.

```python
    def get_child_index(self, name: str) -> int:
        index = name.lstrip("[").rstrip("]")
        if index.isdigit():
            return int(index)
        if name == "len":
            return lldb.UINT32_MAX - 1
        if name == "cap" or name == "capacity":
            return lldb.UINT32_MAX - 2

        return -1
```

We now have to properly coordinate `get_child_at_index` so that the elements, length, and capacity
are all accessible.

```python
def get_child_at_index(self, index: int) -> SBValue:
    if index == UINT32_MAX - 1:
        return self.valobj.GetChildMemberWithName("len")
    if index == UINT32_MAX - 2:
        return (
            self.valobj.GetChildMemberWithName("buf")
            .GetChildMemberWithName("inner")
            .GetChildMemberWithName("cap")
            .GetChildAtIndex(0)
            .Clone("capacity")
        )
    addr = self.data_ptr.GetValueAsAddress()
    addr += index * self.element_type.GetByteSize()
    return self.valobj.CreateValueFromAddress(f"[{index}]", addr, self.element_type)
```

For the type's display name, we can strip the path qualifier.
User defined types named `Vec` will end up fully qualified, so there shouldn't be any ambiguity.
We can also remove the allocator generic, as it's very very rarely useful.
We use `get_template_args` instead of `self.element_type.GetName()` for 3 reasons:

1. If we fail to resolve the element type for any reason, `self.valobj`'s type name can still let
the user know what the real type of the element is
2. Type names are not subject to the limitations of DWARF and PDB nodes, so the template type in
the name will reflect things like `*const`/`*mut` and `&`/`&mut`.
3. As of <!-- date-check --> Nov 2025,
we don't normalize MSVC type names, but once we do, we will need to work with the
string-names of types anyway.
It's also much easier to cache a string-to-string conversion compared
to an `SBType`-to-string conversion.

```python
def get_type_name(self) -> str:
    return f"Vec<{next(get_template_args(self.valobj))}>"
```

There isn't an appropriate primitive value with which to represent a `Vec`, so we simply ommit
the `get_value` function.

## SummaryProvider

The summary provider is very simple thanks to our synthetic provider.
The only real hiccup is that
`GetSummary` only returns a value if the object's type has a `SummaryProvider`.
If it doesn't, it will return an empty string which is not ideal.
In a full set of visualizer scripts, we can ensure
that every type that doesn't have a `GetSummary()` or a `GetValue()` is a struct, and then delegate
to a generic `StructSummaryProvider`.
For this demonstration, I will gloss over that detail.

```python
def VecSummaryProvider(valobj: SBValue, _lldb_internal) -> str:
    children = []
    for i in range(valobj.GetNumChildren()):
        child = valobj.GetChildAtIndex(i)
        summary = child.GetSummary()
        if summary is None:
            summary = child.GetValue()
            if summary is None:
                summary = "{...}"

        children.append(summary)

    return f"vec![{", ".join(children)}]"
```

## Enabling the providers

Assume this synthetic is imported into `lldb_lookup.py`

With CLI commands:

```txt
type synthetic add -l lldb_lookup.synthetic_lookup -x "^(alloc::([a-z_]+::)+)Vec<.+>$" --category Rust
type summary add -F lldb_lookup.summary_lookup -x "^(alloc::([a-z_]+::)+)Vec<.+>$" --category Rust
```

With `__lldb_init_module`:

```python
def __lldb_init_module(debugger: SBDebugger, _dict: LLDBOpaque):
    # Ensure the category exists and is enabled
    rust_cat = debugger.GetCategory("Rust")

    if not rust_cat.IsValid():
        rust_cat = debugger.CreateCategory("Rust")

    rust_cat.SetEnabled(True)

    # Register Vec providers
    vec_regex = r"^(alloc::([a-z_]+::)+)Vec<.+>$"
    sb_name = lldb.SBTypeNameSpecifier(vec_regex, is_regex=True)

    sb_synth = lldb.SBTypeSynthetic.CreateWithClassName("lldb_lookup.VecSyntheticProvider")
    sb_synth.SetOptions(lldb.eTypeOptionCascade)

    sb_summary = lldb.SBTypeSummary.CreateWithFunctionName("lldb_lookup.VecSummaryProvider")
    sb_summary.SetOptions(lldb.eTypeOptionCascade)

    rust_cat.AddTypeSynthetic(sb_name, sb_synth)
    rust_cat.AddSummary(sb_name, sb_summary)
```

## Output

Without providers:

```text
(lldb) v vec_v
(alloc::vec::Vec<int, alloc::alloc::Global>) vec_v = {
  buf = {
    inner = {
      ptr = {
        pointer = (pointer = "\n")
        _marker = {}
      }
      cap = (__0 = 5)
      alloc = {}
    }
    _marker = {}
  }
  len = 5
}
(lldb) v vec_v[0]
error: <user expression 0>:1:6: subscripted value is not an array or pointer
   1 | vec_v[0]
     | ^
```

With providers (`v <var_name>` prints the summary and then a list of all children):

```text
(lldb) v vec_v
(Vec<int>) vec_v = vec![10, 20, 30, 40, 50] {
  [0] = 10
  [1] = 20
  [2] = 30
  [3] = 40
  [4] = 50
}
(lldb) v vec_v[0]
(int) vec_v[0] = 10
```

We can also confirm that the "hidden" length and capacity are still accessible:

```text
(lldb) v vec_v.len
(unsigned long long) vec_v.len = 5
(lldb) v vec_v.capacity
(unsigned long long) vec_v.capacity = 5
(lldb) v vec_v.cap
(unsigned long long) vec_v.cap = 5
```


---

# (WIP) GDB - Python Providers

Below are links to relevant parts of the GDB documentation

* [Overview on writing a pretty printer](https://sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb.html/Writing-a-Pretty_002dPrinter.html#Writing-a-Pretty_002dPrinter)
* [Pretty Printer API](https://sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb.html/Pretty-Printing-API.html#Pretty-Printing-API) (equivalent to LLDB's `SyntheticProvider`)
* [Value API](https://sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb.html/Values-From-Inferior.html#Values-From-Inferior) (equivalent to LLDB's `SBValue`)
* [Type API](https://sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb.html/Types-In-Python.html#Types-In-Python) (equivalent to LLDB's `SBType`)
* [Type Printing API](https://sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb.html/Type-Printing-API.html#Type-Printing-API) (equivalent to LLDB's `SyntheticProvider.get_type_name`)


---

# (WIP) CDB - Natvis

Official documentation for Natvis can be found [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/debugger/create-custom-views-of-native-objects) and [here](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/cpp/natvis)


---

# (WIP) Testing

The debug info test suite is undergoing a substantial rewrite. This section will be filled out as
the rewrite makes progress.

Please see [this tracking issue][148483] for more information.

[148483]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/148483

---

# Debugging support in the Rust compiler

This document explains the state of debugging tools support in the Rust compiler (rustc).
It gives an overview of GDB, LLDB, WinDbg/CDB,
as well as infrastructure around Rust compiler to debug Rust code.
If you want to learn how to debug the Rust compiler itself,
see [Debugging the Compiler].

The material is gathered from the video,
[Tom Tromey discusses debugging support in rustc].

## Preliminaries

### Debuggers

According to Wikipedia

> A [debugger or debugging tool] is a computer program that is used to test and debug
> other programs (the "target" program).

Writing a debugger from scratch for a language requires a lot of work, especially if
debuggers have to be supported on various platforms.
GDB and LLDB, however, can be extended to support debugging a language.
This is the path that Rust has chosen.
This document's main goal is to document the said debuggers support in Rust compiler.

### DWARF

According to the [DWARF] standard website

> DWARF is a debugging file format used by many compilers and debuggers to support source level
> debugging. It addresses the requirements of a number of procedural languages,
> such as C, C++, and Fortran, and is designed to be extensible to other languages.
> DWARF is architecture independent and applicable to any processor or operating system.
> It is widely used on Unix, Linux and other operating systems,
> as well as in stand-alone environments.

DWARF reader is a program that consumes the DWARF format and creates debugger compatible output.
This program may live in the compiler itself.
 DWARF uses a data structure called
Debugging Information Entry (DIE) which stores the information as "tags" to denote functions,
variables etc., e.g., `DW_TAG_variable`, `DW_TAG_pointer_type`, `DW_TAG_subprogram` etc.
You can also invent your own tags and attributes.

### CodeView/PDB

[PDB] (Program Database) is a file format created by Microsoft that contains debug information.
PDBs can be consumed by debuggers such as WinDbg/CDB and other tools to display debug information.
A PDB contains multiple streams that describe debug information about a specific binary such
as types, symbols, and source files used to compile the given binary.
CodeView is another
format which defines the structure of [symbol records] and [type records] that appear within
PDB streams.

## Supported debuggers

### GDB

#### Rust expression parser

To be able to show debug output, we need an expression parser.
This (GDB) expression parser is written in [Bison],
and can parse only a subset of Rust expressions.
GDB parser was written from scratch and has no relation to any other parser,
including that of rustc.

GDB has Rust-like value and type output.
It can print values and types in a way that look like Rust syntax in the output.
Or when you print a type as [ptype] in GDB,
it also looks like Rust source code.
Checkout the documentation in the [manual for GDB/Rust].

#### Parser extensions

Expression parser has a couple of extensions in it to facilitate features that you cannot do
with Rust.
Some limitations are listed in the [manual for GDB/Rust].
There is some special code in the DWARF reader in GDB to support the extensions.

A couple of examples of DWARF reader support needed are as follows:

1. Enum: Needed for support for enum types.
   The Rust compiler writes the information about enum into DWARF,
   and GDB reads the DWARF to understand where is the tag field,
   or if there is a tag field,
   or if the tag slot is shared with non-zero optimization etc.

2. Dissect trait objects: DWARF extension where the trait object's description in the DWARF
   also points to a stub description of the corresponding vtable which in turn points to the
   concrete type for which this trait object exists.
   This means that you can do a `print *object`
   for that trait object, and GDB will understand how to find the correct type of the payload in
   the trait object.

**TODO**: Figure out if the following should be mentioned in the GDB-Rust document rather than
this guide page so there is no duplication.
This is regarding the following comments:

[This comment by Tom](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/pull/316#discussion_r284027340)
> gdb's Rust extensions and limitations are documented in the gdb manual:
https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/Rust.html -- however, this neglects to mention that
gdb convenience variables and registers follow the gdb $ convention, and that the Rust parser
implements the gdb @ extension.

[This question by Aman](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/pull/316#discussion_r285401353)
> @tromey do you think we should mention this part in the GDB-Rust document rather than this
document so there is no duplication etc.?

### LLDB

#### Rust expression parser

This expression parser is written in C++.
It is a type of [Recursive Descent parser].
It implements slightly less of the Rust language than GDB.
LLDB has Rust-like value and type output.

#### Developer notes

* LLDB has a plugin architecture but that does not work for language support.
* GDB generally works better on Linux.

### WinDbg/CDB

Microsoft provides [Windows Debugging Tools] such as the Windows Debugger (WinDbg) and
the Console Debugger (CDB) which both support debugging programs written in Rust.
These debuggers parse the debug info for a binary from the `PDB`, if available, to construct a
visualization to serve up in the debugger.

#### Natvis

Both WinDbg and CDB support defining and viewing custom visualizations for any given type
within the debugger using the Natvis framework.
The Rust compiler defines a set of Natvis
files that define custom visualizations for a subset of types in the standard libraries such
as, `std`, `core`, and `alloc`.
These Natvis files are embedded into `PDBs` generated by the
`*-pc-windows-msvc` target triples to automatically enable these custom visualizations when
debugging.
This default can be overridden by setting the `strip` rustc flag to either `debuginfo` or `symbols`.

Rust has support for embedding Natvis files for crates outside of the standard libraries by
using the `#[debugger_visualizer]` attribute.
For more details on how to embed debugger visualizers,
please refer to the section on the [`debugger_visualizer` attribute].

## DWARF and `rustc`

[DWARF] is the standard way compilers generate debugging information that debuggers read.
It is _the_ debugging format on macOS and Linux.
It is a multi-language and extensible format,
and is mostly good enough for Rust's purposes.
Hence, the current implementation reuses DWARF's concepts.
This is true even if some of the concepts in DWARF do not align with Rust semantically because,
generally, there can be some kind of mapping between the two.

We have some DWARF extensions that the Rust compiler emits and the debuggers understand that
are _not_ in the DWARF standard.

* Rust compiler will emit DWARF for a virtual table, and this `vtable` object will have a
  `DW_AT_containing_type` that points to the real type.
  This lets debuggers dissect a trait object pointer to correctly find the payload.
  Here is an example of such a DIE, from a test case in the gdb repository:

  ```asm
  <1><1a9>: Abbrev Number: 3 (DW_TAG_structure_type)
     <1aa>   DW_AT_containing_type: <0x1b4>
     <1ae>   DW_AT_name        : (indirect string, offset: 0x23d): vtable
     <1b2>   DW_AT_byte_size   : 0
     <1b3>   DW_AT_alignment   : 8
  ```

* The other extension is that the Rust compiler can emit a tagless discriminated union.
  See [DWARF feature request] for this item.

### Current limitations of DWARF

* Traits - require a bigger change than normal to DWARF, on how to represent Traits in DWARF.
* DWARF provides no way to differentiate between Structs and Tuples.
  Rust compiler emits
fields with `__0` and debuggers look for a sequence of such names to overcome this limitation.
For example, in this case the debugger would look at a field via `x.__0` instead of `x.0`.
This is resolved via the Rust parser in the debugger so now you can do `x.0`.

DWARF relies on debuggers to know some information about platform ABI.
Rust does not do that all the time.

## Developer notes

This section is from the talk about certain aspects of development.

## What is missing

### Code signing for LLDB debug server on macOS

According to Wikipedia, [System Integrity Protection] is

> System Integrity Protection (SIP, sometimes referred to as rootless) is a security feature
> of Apple's macOS operating system introduced in OS X El Capitan. It comprises a number of
> mechanisms that are enforced by the kernel. A centerpiece is the protection of system-owned
> files and directories against modifications by processes without a specific "entitlement",
> even when executed by the root user or a user with root privileges (sudo).

It prevents processes using `ptrace` syscall.
If a process wants to use `ptrace` it has to be code signed.
The certificate that signs it has to be trusted on your machine.

See [Apple developer documentation for System Integrity Protection].

We may need to sign up with Apple and get the keys to do this signing.
Tom has looked into if Mozilla cannot do this because it is at the maximum number of
keys it is allowed to sign.
Tom does not know if Mozilla could get more keys.

Alternatively, Tom suggests that maybe a Rust legal entity is needed to get the keys via Apple.
This problem is not technical in nature.
If we had such a key, we could sign GDB as well and ship that.

### DWARF and Traits

Rust traits are not emitted into DWARF at all.
The impact of this is calling a method `x.method()` does not work as-is.
The reason being that method is implemented by a trait, as opposed to a type.
That information is not present, so finding trait methods is missing.

DWARF has a notion of interface types (possibly added for Java).
Tom's idea was to use this interface type as traits.

DWARF only deals with concrete names, not the reference types.
So, a given implementation of a
trait for a type would be one of these interfaces (`DW_tag_interface` type).
Also, the type for which it is implemented would describe all the interfaces this type implements.
This requires a DWARF extension.

Issue on GitHub: [https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/33014]

## Typical process for a Debug Info change (LLVM)

LLVM has Debug Info (DI) builders.
This is the primary thing that Rust calls into.
This is why we need to change LLVM first because that is emitted first and not DWARF directly.
This is a kind of metadata that you construct and hand-off to LLVM.
For the Rustc/LLVM hand-off,
some LLVM DI builder methods are called to construct representation of a type.

The steps of this process are as follows:

1. LLVM needs changing.

   LLVM does not emit Interface types at all, so this needs to be implemented in the LLVM first.

   Get sign off on LLVM maintainers that this is a good idea.

2. Change the DWARF extension.

3. Update the debuggers.

   Update DWARF readers, expression evaluators.

4. Update Rust compiler.

   Change it to emit this new information.

### Procedural macro stepping

A deeply profound question is that how do you actually debug a procedural macro?
What is the location you emit for a macro expansion?
Consider some of the following cases -

* You can emit location of the invocation of the macro.
* You can emit the location of the definition of the macro.
* You can emit locations of the content of the macro.

RFC: [https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2117]

Focus is to let macros decide what to do.
This can be achieved by having some kind of attribute
that lets the macro tell the compiler where the line marker should be.
This affects where you set the breakpoints and what happens when you step it.

## Source file checksums in debug info

Both DWARF and CodeView (PDB) support embedding a cryptographic hash of each source file that
contributed to the associated binary.

The cryptographic hash can be used by a debugger to verify that the source file matches the
executable.
If the source file does not match, the debugger can provide a warning to the user.

The hash can also be used to prove that a given source file has not been modified since it was
used to compile an executable.
Because MD5 and SHA1 both have demonstrated vulnerabilities,
using SHA256 is recommended for this application.

The Rust compiler stores the hash for each source file in the corresponding `SourceFile` in
the `SourceMap`.
The hashes of input files to external crates are stored in `rlib` metadata.

A default hashing algorithm is set in the target specification.
This allows the target to
specify the best hash available, since not all targets support all hash algorithms.

The hashing algorithm for a target can also be overridden with the `-Z source-file-checksum=`
command-line option.

#### DWARF 5
DWARF version 5 supports embedding an MD5 hash to validate the source file version in use.
DWARF 5 - Section 6.2.4.1 opcode DW_LNCT_MD5

#### LLVM
LLVM IR supports MD5 and SHA1 (and SHA256 in LLVM 11+) source file checksums in the DIFile node.

[LLVM DIFile documentation](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#difile)

#### Microsoft Visual C++ Compiler /ZH option
The MSVC compiler supports embedding MD5, SHA1, or SHA256 hashes in the PDB using the `/ZH`
compiler option.

[MSVC /ZH documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/reference/zh)

#### Clang
Clang always embeds an MD5 checksum, though this does not appear in documentation.

## Future work

#### Name mangling changes

* New demangler in `libiberty` (gcc source tree).
* New demangler in LLVM or LLDB.

**TODO**: Check the location of the demangler source.
[#1157](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/issues/1157)

#### Reuse Rust compiler for expressions

This is an important idea because debuggers by and large do not try to implement type inference.
You need to be much more explicit when you type into the debugger than your actual source code.
So, you cannot just copy and paste an expression from your source
code to debugger and expect the same answer, but this would be nice.
This can be helped by using compiler.

It is certainly doable, but it is a large project.
You certainly need a bridge to the debugger because the debugger alone has access to the memory.
Both GDB (gcc) and LLDB (clang) have this feature.
LLDB uses Clang to compile code to JIT and GDB can do the same with GCC.

Both debuggers expression evaluation implement both a superset and a subset of Rust.
They implement just the expression language,
but they also add some extensions like GDB has convenience variables.
Therefore, if you are taking this route,
then you not only need to do this bridge,
but may have to add some mode to let the compiler understand some extensions.

[Tom Tromey discusses debugging support in rustc]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=elBxMRSNYr4
[Debugging the Compiler]: compiler-debugging.md
[debugger or debugging tool]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debugger
[Bison]: https://www.gnu.org/software/bison/
[ptype]: https://ftp.gnu.org/old-gnu/Manuals/gdb/html_node/gdb_109.html
[rust-lang/lldb wiki page]: https://github.com/rust-lang/lldb/wiki
[DWARF]: http://dwarfstd.org
[manual for GDB/Rust]: https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/Rust.html
[GDB Bugzilla]: https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/
[Recursive Descent parser]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recursive_descent_parser
[System Integrity Protection]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_Integrity_Protection
[https://github.com/rust-dev-tools/gdb]: https://github.com/rust-dev-tools/gdb
[DWARF feature request]: http://dwarfstd.org/ShowIssue.php?issue=180517.2
[https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/stable.html]: https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/stable.html
[https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2117]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2117
[https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/33014]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/33014
[https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/34457]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/34457
[Apple developer documentation for System Integrity Protection]: https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/releasenotes/MacOSX/WhatsNewInOSX/Articles/MacOSX10_11.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40016227-SW11
[https://github.com/rust-lang/lldb]: https://github.com/rust-lang/lldb
[https://github.com/rust-lang/llvm-project]: https://github.com/rust-lang/llvm-project
[PDB]: https://llvm.org/docs/PDB/index.html
[symbol records]: https://llvm.org/docs/PDB/CodeViewSymbols.html
[type records]: https://llvm.org/docs/PDB/CodeViewTypes.html
[Windows Debugging Tools]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/debugger/
[`debugger_visualizer` attribute]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/reference/attributes/debugger.html#the-debugger_visualizer-attribute
