# Rust 2021

| Info | |
| --- | --- |
| RFC | [#3085](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3085) |
| Release version | [1.56.0](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2021/10/21/Rust-1.56.0/) |

The Rust 2021 Edition contains several changes that bring new capabilities and more consistency to the language,
and opens up room for expansion in the future.
The following chapters dive into the details of each change,
and they include guidance on migrating your existing code.


---

# Additions to the prelude

## Summary

- The `TryInto`, `TryFrom` and `FromIterator` traits are now part of the prelude.
- This might make calls to trait methods ambiguous which could make some code fail to compile.

## Details

The [prelude of the standard library](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/prelude/index.html)
is the module containing everything that is automatically imported in every module.
It contains commonly used items such as `Option`, `Vec`, `drop`, and `Clone`.

The Rust compiler prioritizes any manually imported items over those
from the prelude, to make sure additions to the prelude will not break any existing code.
For example, if you have a crate or module called `example` containing a `pub struct Option;`,
then `use example::*;` will make `Option` unambiguously refer to the one from `example`;
not the one from the standard library.

However, adding a _trait_ to the prelude can break existing code in a subtle way.
For example, a call to `x.try_into()` which comes from a `MyTryInto` trait might fail 
to compile if `std`'s `TryInto` is also imported, because the call to `try_into` is now 
ambiguous and could come from either trait. This is the reason we haven't added `TryInto` 
to the prelude yet, since there is a lot of code that would break this way.

As a solution, Rust 2021 will use a new prelude.
It's identical to the current one, except for three new additions:

- [`std::convert::TryInto`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/convert/trait.TryInto.html)
- [`std::convert::TryFrom`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/convert/trait.TryFrom.html)
- [`std::iter::FromIterator`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/iter/trait.FromIterator.html)

The tracking issue [can be found here](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/85684).

## Migration 

As a part of the 2021 edition a migration lint, `rust_2021_prelude_collisions`, has been added in order to aid in automatic migration of Rust 2018 codebases to Rust 2021.

In order to migrate your code to be Rust 2021 Edition compatible, run:

```sh
cargo fix --edition
```

The lint detects cases where functions or methods are called that have the same name as the methods defined in one of the new prelude traits. In some cases, it may rewrite your calls in various ways to ensure that you continue to call the same function you did before.

If you'd like to migrate your code manually or better understand what `cargo fix` is doing, below we've outlined the situations where a migration is needed along with a counter example of when it's not needed.

### Migration needed

#### Conflicting trait methods

When two traits that are in scope have the same method name, it is ambiguous which trait method should be used. For example:

```rust
trait MyTrait<A> {
  // This name is the same as the `from_iter` method on the `FromIterator` trait from `std`.  
  fn from_iter(x: Option<A>);
}

impl<T> MyTrait<()> for Vec<T> {
  fn from_iter(_: Option<()>) {}
}

fn main() {
  // Vec<T> implements both `std::iter::FromIterator` and `MyTrait` 
  // If both traits are in scope (as would be the case in Rust 2021),
  // then it becomes ambiguous which `from_iter` method to call
  <Vec<i32>>::from_iter(None);
}
```

We can fix this by using fully qualified syntax:

```rust,ignore
fn main() {
  // Now it is clear which trait method we're referring to
  <Vec<i32> as MyTrait<()>>::from_iter(None);
}
```

#### Inherent methods on `dyn Trait` objects

Some users invoke methods on a `dyn Trait` value where the method name overlaps with a new prelude trait:

```rust
mod submodule {
  pub trait MyTrait {
    // This has the same name as `TryInto::try_into`
    fn try_into(&self) -> Result<u32, ()>;
  }
}

// `MyTrait` isn't in scope here and can only be referred to through the path `submodule::MyTrait`
fn bar(f: Box<dyn submodule::MyTrait>) {
  // If `std::convert::TryInto` is in scope (as would be the case in Rust 2021),
  // then it becomes ambiguous which `try_into` method to call
  f.try_into();
}
```

Unlike with static dispatch methods, calling a trait method on a trait object does not require that the trait be in scope. The code above works 
as long as there is no trait in scope with a conflicting method name. When the `TryInto` trait is in scope (which is the case in Rust 2021),
this causes an ambiguity. Should the call be to `MyTrait::try_into` or `std::convert::TryInto::try_into`?

In these cases, we can fix this by adding an additional dereferences or otherwise clarify the type of the method receiver. This ensures that 
the `dyn Trait` method is chosen, versus the methods from the prelude trait. For example, turning `f.try_into()` above into `(&*f).try_into()` 
ensures that we're calling `try_into` on the `dyn MyTrait` which can only refer to the `MyTrait::try_into` method.

### No migration needed

####  Inherent methods

Many types define their own inherent methods with the same name as a trait method. For instance, below the struct `MyStruct` implements `from_iter` which shares the same name with the method from the trait `FromIterator` found in the standard library:

```rust
use std::iter::IntoIterator;

struct MyStruct {
  data: Vec<u32>
}

impl MyStruct {
  // This has the same name as `std::iter::FromIterator::from_iter`
  fn from_iter(iter: impl IntoIterator<Item = u32>) -> Self {
    Self {
      data: iter.into_iter().collect()
    }
  }
}

impl std::iter::FromIterator<u32> for MyStruct {
    fn from_iter<I: IntoIterator<Item = u32>>(iter: I) -> Self {
      Self {
        data: iter.into_iter().collect()
      }
    }
}
```

Inherent methods always take precedent over trait methods so there's no need for any migration.

### Implementation Reference

The lint needs to take a couple of factors into account when determining whether or not introducing 2021 Edition to a codebase will cause a name resolution collision (thus breaking the code after changing edition). These factors include:

- Is the call a [fully-qualified call] or does it use [dot-call method syntax]?
  - This will affect how the name is resolved due to auto-reference and auto-dereferencing on method call syntax. Manually dereferencing/referencing will allow specifying priority in the case of dot-call method syntax, while fully-qualified call requires specification of the type and the trait name in the method path (e.g. `<Type as Trait>::method`)
- Is this an [inherent method] or [a trait method]?
  - Inherent methods that take `self` will take priority over `TryInto::try_into` as inherent methods take priority over trait methods, but inherent methods that take `&self` or `&mut self` won't take priority due to requiring a auto-reference (while `TryInto::try_into` does not, as it takes `self`)
- Is the origin of this method from `core`/`std`? (As the traits can't have a collision with themselves)
- Does the given type implement the trait it could have a collision against?
- Is the method being called via dynamic dispatch? (i.e. is the `self` type `dyn Trait`)
  - If so, trait imports don't affect resolution, and no migration lint needs to occur

[fully-qualified call]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/call-expr.html#disambiguating-function-calls
[dot-call method syntax]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/method-call-expr.html
[inherent method]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/implementations.html#inherent-implementations
[a trait method]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/implementations.html#trait-implementations


---

# Default Cargo feature resolver

## Summary

- `edition = "2021"` implies `resolver = "2"` in `Cargo.toml`.

## Details

Since Rust 1.51.0, Cargo has opt-in support for a [new feature resolver][4]
which can be activated with `resolver = "2"` in `Cargo.toml`.

Starting in Rust 2021, this will be the default.
That is, writing `edition = "2021"` in `Cargo.toml` will imply `resolver = "2"`.

The resolver is a global setting for a [workspace], and the setting is ignored in dependencies.
The setting is only honored for the top-level package of the workspace.
If you are using a [virtual workspace], you will still need to explicitly set the [`resolver` field]
in the `[workspace]` definition if you want to opt-in to the new resolver.

The new feature resolver no longer merges all requested features for
crates that are depended on in multiple ways.
See [the announcement of Rust 1.51][5] for details.

[4]: ../../cargo/reference/resolver.html#feature-resolver-version-2
[5]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2021/03/25/Rust-1.51.0.html#cargos-new-feature-resolver
[workspace]: ../../cargo/reference/workspaces.html
[virtual workspace]: ../../cargo/reference/workspaces.html#virtual-workspace
[`resolver` field]: ../../cargo/reference/resolver.html#resolver-versions

## Migration

There are no automated migration tools for updating for the new resolver.
For most projects, there are usually few or no changes as a result of updating.

When updating with `cargo fix --edition`, Cargo will display a report if the new resolver will build dependencies with different features.
It may look something like this:

> note: Switching to Edition 2021 will enable the use of the version 2 feature resolver in Cargo.
> This may cause some dependencies to be built with fewer features enabled than previously.
> More information about the resolver changes may be found at <https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/edition-guide/rust-2021/default-cargo-resolver.html><br>
> When building the following dependencies, the given features will no longer be used:
>
> ```text
>   bstr v0.2.16: default, lazy_static, regex-automata, unicode
>   libz-sys v1.1.3 (as host dependency): libc
> ```

This lets you know that certain dependencies will no longer be built with the given features.

### Build failures

There may be some circumstances where your project may not build correctly after the change.
If a dependency declaration in one package assumes that certain features are enabled in another, and those features are now disabled, it may fail to compile.

For example, let's say we have a dependency like this:

```toml
# Cargo.toml

[dependencies]
bstr = { version = "0.2.16", default-features = false }
# ...
```

And somewhere in our dependency tree, another package has this:

```toml
# Another package's Cargo.toml

[build-dependencies]
bstr = "0.2.16"
```

In our package, we've been using the [`words_with_breaks`](https://docs.rs/bstr/0.2.16/bstr/trait.ByteSlice.html#method.words_with_breaks) method from `bstr`, which requires `bstr`'s  "unicode" feature to be enabled.
This has historically worked because Cargo unified the features of `bstr` between the two packages.
However, after updating to Rust 2021, the new resolver will build `bstr` twice, once with the default features (as a build dependency), and once with no features (as our normal dependency).
Since `bstr` is now being built without the "unicode" feature, the `words_with_breaks` method doesn't exist, and the build will fail with an error that the method is missing.

The solution here is to ensure that the dependency is declared with the features you are actually using.
For example:

```toml
[dependencies]
bstr = { version = "0.2.16", default-features = false, features = ["unicode"] }
```

In some cases, this may be a problem with a third-party dependency that you don't have direct control over.
You can consider submitting a patch to that project to try to declare the correct set of features for the problematic dependency.
Alternatively, you can add features to any dependency from within your own `Cargo.toml` file.
For example, if the `bstr` example given above was declared in some third-party dependency, you can just copy the correct dependency declaration into your own project.
The features will be unified, as long as they match the unification rules of the new resolver. Those are:

* Features enabled on platform-specific dependencies for targets not currently being built are ignored.
* Build-dependencies and proc-macros do not share features with normal dependencies.
* Dev-dependencies do not activate features unless building a target that needs them (like tests or examples).

A real-world example is using [`diesel`](https://crates.io/crates/diesel) and [`diesel_migrations`](https://crates.io/crates/diesel_migrations).
These packages provide database support, and the database is selected using a feature, like this:

```toml
[dependencies]
diesel = { version = "1.4.7", features = ["postgres"] }
diesel_migrations = "1.4.0"
```

The problem is that `diesel_migrations` has an internal proc-macro which itself depends on `diesel`, and the proc-macro assumes its own copy of `diesel` has the same features enabled as the rest of the dependency graph.
After updating to the new resolver, it fails to build because now there are two copies of `diesel`, and the one built for the proc-macro is missing the "postgres" feature.

A solution here is to add `diesel` as a build-dependency with the required features, for example:

```toml
[build-dependencies]
diesel = { version = "1.4.7", features = ["postgres"] }
```

This causes Cargo to add "postgres" as a feature for host dependencies (proc-macros and build-dependencies).
Now, the `diesel_migrations` proc-macro will get the "postgres" feature enabled, and it will build correctly.

The 2.0 release of `diesel` (currently in development) does not have this problem as it has been restructured to not have this dependency requirement.

### Exploring features

The [`cargo tree`] command has had substantial improvements to help with the migration to the new resolver.
`cargo tree` can be used to explore the dependency graph, and to see which features are being enabled, and importantly *why* they are being enabled.

One option is to use the `--duplicates` flag (`-d` for short), which will tell you when a package is being built multiple times.
Taking the `bstr` example from earlier, we might see:

```console
> cargo tree -d
bstr v0.2.16
└── foo v0.1.0 (/MyProjects/foo)

bstr v0.2.16
[build-dependencies]
└── bar v0.1.0
    └── foo v0.1.0 (/MyProjects/foo)

```

This output tells us that `bstr` is built twice, and shows the chain of dependencies that led to its inclusion in both cases.

You can print which features each package is using with the `-f` flag, like this:

```console
cargo tree -f '{p} {f}'
```

This tells Cargo to change the "format" of the output, where it will print both the package and the enabled features.

You can also use the `-e` flag to tell it which "edges" to display.
For example, `cargo tree -e features` will show in-between each dependency which features are being added by each dependency.
This option becomes more useful with the `-i` flag which can be used to "invert" the tree.
This allows you to see how features *flow* into a given dependency.
For example, let's say the dependency graph is large, and we're not quite sure who is depending on `bstr`, the following command will show that:

```console
> cargo tree -e features -i bstr
bstr v0.2.16
├── bstr feature "default"
│   [build-dependencies]
│   └── bar v0.1.0
│       └── bar feature "default"
│           └── foo v0.1.0 (/MyProjects/foo)
├── bstr feature "lazy_static"
│   └── bstr feature "unicode"
│       └── bstr feature "default" (*)
├── bstr feature "regex-automata"
│   └── bstr feature "unicode" (*)
├── bstr feature "std"
│   └── bstr feature "default" (*)
└── bstr feature "unicode" (*)
```

This snippet of output shows that the project `foo` depends on `bar` with the "default" feature.
Then, `bar` depends on `bstr` as a build-dependency with the "default" feature.
We can further see that `bstr`'s  "default" feature enables "unicode" (among other features).

[`cargo tree`]: ../../cargo/commands/cargo-tree.html


---

# IntoIterator for arrays

## Summary

- Arrays implement `IntoIterator` in *all* editions.
- Calls to `IntoIterator::into_iter` are *hidden* in Rust 2015 and Rust 2018 when using method call syntax
  (i.e., `array.into_iter()`). So, `array.into_iter()` still resolves to `(&array).into_iter()` as it
  has before.
- `array.into_iter()` changes meaning to be the call to `IntoIterator::into_iter` in Rust 2021.

## Details

Until Rust 1.53, only *references* to arrays implement `IntoIterator`.
This means you can iterate over `&[1, 2, 3]` and `&mut [1, 2, 3]`,
but not over `[1, 2, 3]` directly.

```rust,ignore
for &e in &[1, 2, 3] {} // Ok :)

for e in [1, 2, 3] {} // Error :(
```

This has been [a long-standing issue][25], but the solution is not as simple as it seems.
Just [adding the trait implementation][20] would break existing code.
`array.into_iter()` already compiles today because that implicitly calls
`(&array).into_iter()` due to [how method call syntax works][22].
Adding the trait implementation would change the meaning.

Usually this type of breakage (adding a trait implementation) is categorized as 'minor' and acceptable.
But in this case there is too much code that would be broken by it.

It has been suggested many times to "only implement `IntoIterator` for arrays in Rust 2021".
However, this is simply not possible.
You can't have a trait implementation exist in one edition and not in another,
since editions can be mixed.

Instead, the trait implementation was added in *all* editions (starting in Rust 1.53.0)
but with a small hack to avoid breakage until Rust 2021.
In Rust 2015 and 2018 code, the compiler will still resolve `array.into_iter()`
to `(&array).into_iter()` like before, as if the trait implementation does not exist.
This *only* applies to the `.into_iter()` method call syntax.
It does not affect any other syntax such as `for e in [1, 2, 3]`, `iter.zip([1, 2, 3])` or
`IntoIterator::into_iter([1, 2, 3])`.
Those will start to work in *all* editions.

While it's a shame that this required a small hack to avoid breakage,
this solution keeps the difference between the editions to an absolute minimum.

[25]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/25725
[20]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/65819
[22]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch05-03-method-syntax.html#wheres-the---operator

## Migration

A lint, `array_into_iter`, gets triggered whenever there is some call to `into_iter()` that will change
meaning in Rust 2021. The `array_into_iter` lint has already been a warning by default on all editions 
since the 1.41 release (with several enhancements made in 1.55). If your code is already warning free, 
then it should already be ready to go for Rust 2021!

You can automatically migrate your code to be Rust 2021 Edition compatible or ensure it is already compatible by
running:

```sh
cargo fix --edition
```

Because the difference between editions is small, the migration to Rust 2021 is fairly straight-forward.

For method calls of `into_iter` on arrays, the elements being implemented will change from references to owned values.

For example:

```rust
fn main() {
  let array = [1u8, 2, 3];
  for x in array.into_iter() {
    // x is a `&u8` in Rust 2015 and Rust 2018
    // x is a `u8` in Rust 2021
  }
}
```

The most straightforward way to migrate in Rust 2021, is by keeping the exact behavior from previous editions
by calling `iter()` which also iterates over owned arrays by reference:

```rust
fn main() {
  let array = [1u8, 2, 3];
  for x in array.iter() { // <- This line changed
    // x is a `&u8` in all editions
  }
}
```

### Optional migration

If you are using fully qualified method syntax (i.e., `IntoIterator::into_iter(array)`) in a previous edition,
this can be upgraded to method call syntax (i.e., `array.into_iter()`).


---

# Disjoint capture in closures

## Summary

- `|| a.x + 1` now captures only `a.x` instead of `a`.
- This can cause things to be dropped at different times or affect whether closures implement traits like `Send` or `Clone`.
  - If possible changes are detected, `cargo fix` will insert statements like `let _ = &a` to force a closure to capture the entire variable.

## Details

[Closures](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch13-01-closures.html)
automatically capture anything that you refer to from within their body.
For example, `|| a + 1` automatically captures a reference to `a` from the surrounding context.

In Rust 2018 and before, closures capture entire variables, even if the closure only uses one field.
For example, `|| a.x + 1` captures a reference to `a` and not just `a.x`.
Capturing `a` in its entirety prevents mutation or moves from other fields of `a`, so that code like this does not compile:

```rust,ignore
let a = SomeStruct::new();
drop(a.x); // Move out of one field of the struct
println!("{}", a.y); // Ok: Still use another field of the struct
let c = || println!("{}", a.y); // Error: Tries to capture all of `a`
c();
```

Starting in Rust 2021, closures captures are more precise. Typically they will only capture the fields they use (in some cases, they might capture more than just what they use, see the Rust reference for full details). Therefore, the above example will compile fine in Rust 2021.

Disjoint capture was proposed as part of [RFC 2229](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/2229-capture-disjoint-fields.md) and the RFC contains details about the motivation.

## Migration

As a part of the 2021 edition a migration lint, `rust_2021_incompatible_closure_captures`, has been added in order to aid in automatic migration of Rust 2018 codebases to Rust 2021.

In order to migrate your code to be Rust 2021 Edition compatible, run:

```sh
cargo fix --edition
```

Below is an examination of how to manually migrate code to use closure captures that are compatible with Rust 2021 should the automatic migration fail 
or you would like to better understand how the migration works.

Changing the variables captured by a closure can cause programs to change behavior or to stop compiling in two cases:

- changes to drop order, or when destructors run ([details](#drop-order));
- changes to which traits a closure implements ([details](#trait-implementations)).

Whenever any of the scenarios below are detected, `cargo fix` will insert a "dummy let" into your closure to force it to capture the entire variable:

```rust
let x = (vec![22], vec![23]);
let c = move || {
    // "Dummy let" that forces `x` to be captured in its entirety
    let _ = &x;

    // Otherwise, only `x.0` would be captured here
    println!("{:?}", x.0);
};
```

This is a conservative analysis: in many cases, these dummy lets can be safely removed and your program will work fine.

### Wild Card Patterns

Closures now only capture data that needs to be read, which means the following closures will not capture `x`:

```rust
let x = 10;
let c = || {
    let _ = x; // no-op
};

let c = || match x {
    _ => println!("Hello World!")
};
```

The `let _ = x` statement here is a no-op, since the `_` pattern completely ignores the right-hand side, and `x` is a reference to a place in memory (in this case, a variable).

This change by itself (capturing fewer values) doesn't trigger any suggestions, but it may do so in conjunction with the "drop order" change below.

**Subtle:** There are other similar expressions, such as the "dummy lets" `let _ = &x` that we insert, which are not no-ops. This is because the right-hand side (`&x`) is not a reference to a place in memory, but rather an expression that must first be evaluated (and whose result is then discarded).

### Drop Order

When a closure takes ownership of a value from a variable `t`, that value is then dropped when the closure is dropped, and not when the variable `t` goes out of scope:

```rust
# fn move_value<T>(_: T){}
{
    let t = (vec![0], vec![0]);

    {
        let c = || move_value(t); // t is moved here
    } // c is dropped, which drops the tuple `t` as well
} // t goes out of scope here
```

The above code will run the same in both Rust 2018 and Rust 2021. However, in cases where the closure only takes ownership of _part_ of a variable, there can be differences:

```rust
# fn move_value<T>(_: T){}
{
    let t = (vec![0], vec![0]);

    {
        let c = || {
            // In Rust 2018, captures all of `t`.
            // In Rust 2021, captures only `t.0`
            move_value(t.0);
        };

        // In Rust 2018, `c` (and `t`) are both dropped when we
        // exit this block.
        //
        // In Rust 2021, `c` and `t.0` are both dropped when we
        // exit this block.
    }

// In Rust 2018, the value from `t` has been moved and is
// not dropped.
//
// In Rust 2021, the value from `t.0` has been moved, but `t.1`
// remains, so it will be dropped here.
}
```

In most cases, dropping values at different times just affects when memory is freed and is not important. However, some `Drop` impls (aka, destructors) have side-effects, and changing the drop order in those cases can alter the semantics of your program. In such cases, the compiler will suggest inserting a dummy `let` to force the entire variable to be captured.

### Trait implementations

Closures automatically implement the following traits based on what values they capture:

- [`Clone`]: if all captured values are `Clone`.
- [Auto traits] like [`Send`], [`Sync`], and [`UnwindSafe`]: if all captured values implement the given trait.

[auto traits]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/reference/special-types-and-traits.html#auto-traits
[`clone`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/clone/trait.Clone.html
[`send`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/marker/trait.Send.html
[`sync`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/marker/trait.Sync.html
[`unwindsafe`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/panic/trait.UnwindSafe.html

In Rust 2021, since different values are being captured, this can affect what traits a closure will implement. The migration lints test each closure to see whether it would have implemented a given trait before and whether it still implements it now; if they find that a trait used to be implemented but no longer is, then "dummy lets" are inserted.

For instance, a common way to allow passing around raw pointers between threads is to wrap them in a struct and then implement `Send`/`Sync` auto trait for the wrapper. The closure that is passed to `thread::spawn` uses the specific fields within the wrapper but the entire wrapper is captured regardless. Since the wrapper is `Send`/`Sync`, the code is considered safe and therefore compiles successfully.

With disjoint captures, only the specific field mentioned in the closure gets captured, which wasn't originally `Send`/`Sync` defeating the purpose of the wrapper.

```rust
use std::thread;

struct Ptr(*mut i32);
unsafe impl Send for Ptr {}


let mut x = 5;
let px = Ptr(&mut x as *mut i32);

let c = thread::spawn(move || {
    unsafe {
        *(px.0) += 10;
    }
}); // Closure captured px.0 which is not Send
```


---

# Panic macro consistency

## Summary

- `panic!(..)` now always uses `format_args!(..)`, just like `println!()`.
- `panic!("{")` is no longer accepted, without escaping the `{` as `{{`.
- `panic!(x)` is no longer accepted if `x` is not a string literal.
  - Use `std::panic::panic_any(x)` to panic with a non-string payload.
  - Or use `panic!("{}", x)` to use `x`'s `Display` implementation.
- The same applies to `assert!(expr, ..)`.

## Details

The `panic!()` macro is one of Rust's most well known macros.
However, it has [some subtle surprises](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/3007-panic-plan.md)
that we can't just change due to backwards compatibility.

```rust,ignore
// Rust 2018
panic!("{}", 1); // Ok, panics with the message "1"
panic!("{}"); // Ok, panics with the message "{}"
```

The `panic!()` macro only uses string formatting when it's invoked with more than one argument.
When invoked with a single argument, it doesn't even look at that argument.

```rust,ignore
// Rust 2018
let a = "{";
println!(a); // Error: First argument must be a format string literal
panic!(a); // Ok: The panic macro doesn't care
```

It even accepts non-strings such as `panic!(123)`, which is uncommon and rarely useful since it
produces a surprisingly unhelpful message: `panicked at 'Box<Any>'`.

This will especially be a problem once
[implicit format arguments](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2795-format-args-implicit-identifiers.html)
are stabilized.
That feature will make `println!("hello {name}")` a short-hand for `println!("hello {}", name)`.
However, `panic!("hello {name}")` would not work as expected,
since `panic!()` doesn't process a single argument as format string.

To avoid that confusing situation, Rust 2021 features a more consistent `panic!()` macro.
The new `panic!()` macro will no longer accept arbitrary expressions as the only argument.
It will, just like `println!()`, always process the first argument as format string.
Since `panic!()` will no longer accept arbitrary payloads,
[`panic_any()`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/panic/fn.panic_any.html)
will be the only way to panic with something other than a formatted string.

```rust,ignore
// Rust 2021
panic!("{}", 1); // Ok, panics with the message "1"
panic!("{}"); // Error, missing argument
panic!(a); // Error, must be a string literal
```

In addition, `core::panic!()` and `std::panic!()` will be identical in Rust 2021.
Currently, there are some historical differences between those two,
which can be noticeable when switching `#![no_std]` on or off.

## Migration

A lint, `non_fmt_panics`, gets triggered whenever there is some call to `panic` that uses some 
deprecated behavior that will error in Rust 2021. The `non_fmt_panics` lint has already been a warning 
by default on all editions since the 1.50 release (with several enhancements made in later releases). 
If your code is already warning free, then it should already be ready to go for Rust 2021!

You can automatically migrate your code to be Rust 2021 Edition compatible or ensure it is already compatible by
running:

```sh
cargo fix --edition
```

Should you choose or need to manually migrate, you'll need to update all panic invocations to either use the same 
formatting as `println` or use `std::panic::panic_any` to panic with non-string data.

For example, in the case of `panic!(MyStruct)`, you'll need to convert to using `std::panic::panic_any` (note
that this is a function not a macro): `std::panic::panic_any(MyStruct)`.

In the case of panic messages that include curly braces but the wrong number of arguments (e.g., `panic!("Some curlies: {}")`), 
you can panic with the string literal by either using the same syntax as `println!` (i.e., `panic!("{}", "Some curlies: {}")`) 
or by escaping the curly braces (i.e., `panic!("Some curlies: {{}}")`).

---

# Reserved syntax

## Summary

- `any_identifier#`, `any_identifier"..."`, `any_identifier'...'`, and `'any_identifier#` are now reserved syntax, and no longer tokenize.
- This is mostly relevant to macros. E.g. `quote!{ #a#b }` is no longer accepted.
- It doesn't treat keywords specially, so e.g. `match"..." {}` is no longer accepted.
- Insert whitespace between the identifier and the subsequent `#`, `"`, or `'`
  to avoid errors.
- Edition migrations will help you insert whitespace in such cases.

## Details

To make space for new syntax in the future,
we've decided to reserve syntax for prefixed identifiers, literals, and lifetimes:
`prefix#identifier`, `prefix"string"`, `prefix'c'`, `prefix#123`, and `'prefix#`,
where `prefix` can be any identifier.
(Except those prefixes that already have a meaning, such as `b'...'` (byte
chars) and `r"..."` (raw strings).)

This provides syntax we can expand into in the future without requiring an
edition boundary. We may use this for temporary syntax until the next edition,
or for permanent syntax if appropriate.

Without an edition, this would be a breaking change, since macros can currently
accept syntax such as `hello"world"`, which they will see as two separate
tokens: `hello` and `"world"`. The (automatic) fix is simple though: just
insert a space: `hello "world"`. Likewise, `prefix#ident` should become
`prefix #ident`. Edition migrations will help with this fix.

Other than turning these into a tokenization error,
[the RFC][10] does not attach a meaning to any prefix yet.
Assigning meaning to specific prefixes is left to future proposals,
which will now&mdash;thanks to reserving these prefixes&mdash;not be breaking changes.

Some new prefixes you might potentially see in the future (though we haven't
committed to any of them yet):

- `k#keyword` to allow writing keywords that don't exist yet in the current edition.
  For example, while `async` is not a keyword in edition 2015,
  this prefix would've allowed us to accept `k#async` in edition 2015
  without having to wait for edition 2018 to reserve `async` as a keyword.

- `f""` as a short-hand for a format string.
  For example, `f"hello {name}"` as a short-hand for the equivalent `format!()` invocation.

- `s""` for `String` literals.

[10]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3101


## Migration 

As a part of the 2021 edition a migration lint, [`rust_2021_prefixes_incompatible_syntax`], has been added in order to aid in automatic migration of Rust 2018 codebases to Rust 2021.

In order to migrate your code to be Rust 2021 Edition compatible, run:

```sh
cargo fix --edition
```

Should you want or need to manually migrate your code, migration is fairly straight-forward.

Let's say you have a macro that is defined like so:

```rust
macro_rules! my_macro {
    ($a:tt $b:tt) => {};
}
```

In Rust 2015 and 2018 it's legal for this macro to be called like so with no space between the first token tree and the second:

```rust,ignore
my_macro!(z"hey");
```

This `z` prefix is no longer allowed in Rust 2021, so in order to call this macro, you must add a space after the prefix like so:

```rust,ignore
my_macro!(z "hey");
```

[`rust_2021_prefixes_incompatible_syntax`]: ../../rustc/lints/listing/allowed-by-default.html#rust-2021-prefixes-incompatible-syntax


---

# Raw lifetimes

## Summary

- `'r#ident_or_keyword` is now allowed as a lifetime, which allows using keywords such as `'r#fn`.

## Details

Raw lifetimes are introduced in the 2021 edition to support the ability to migrate to newer editions that introduce new keywords. This is analogous to [raw identifiers] which provide the same functionality for identifiers. For example, the 2024 edition introduced the `gen` keyword. Since lifetimes cannot be keywords, this would cause code that use a lifetime `'gen` to fail to compile. Raw lifetimes allow the migration lint to modify those lifetimes to `'r#gen` which do allow keywords.

In editions prior to 2021, raw lifetimes are parsed as separate tokens. For example `'r#foo` is parsed as three tokens: `'r`, `#`, and `foo`.

[raw identifiers]: ../../reference/identifiers.html#raw-identifiers

## Migration

As a part of the 2021 edition a migration lint, [`rust_2021_prefixes_incompatible_syntax`], has been added in order to aid in automatic migration of Rust 2018 codebases to Rust 2021.

In order to migrate your code to be Rust 2021 Edition compatible, run:

```sh
cargo fix --edition
```

Should you want or need to manually migrate your code, migration is fairly straight-forward.

Let's say you have a macro that is defined like so:

```rust
macro_rules! my_macro {
    ($a:tt $b:tt $c:tt) => {};
}
```

In Rust 2015 and 2018 it's legal for this macro to be called like so with no space between the tokens:

```rust,ignore
my_macro!('r#foo);
```

In the 2021 edition, this is now parsed as a single token. In order to call this macro, you must add a space before the identifier like so:

```rust,ignore
my_macro!('r# foo);
```

[`rust_2021_prefixes_incompatible_syntax`]: ../../rustc/lints/listing/allowed-by-default.html#rust-2021-prefixes-incompatible-syntax


---

# Warnings promoted to errors

## Summary

- Code that triggered the `bare_trait_objects` and `ellipsis_inclusive_range_patterns` lints will error in Rust 2021.

## Details

Two existing lints are becoming hard errors in Rust 2021, but these lints will remain warnings in older editions.

### `bare_trait_objects`:

The use of the `dyn` keyword to identify [trait objects](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch17-02-trait-objects.html)
will be mandatory in Rust 2021.

For example, the following code which does not include the `dyn` keyword in `&MyTrait`
will produce an error instead of just a lint in Rust 2021:

```rust
pub trait MyTrait {}

pub fn my_function(_trait_object: &MyTrait) { // should be `&dyn MyTrait`
  unimplemented!()
}
```

### `ellipsis_inclusive_range_patterns`:

The [deprecated `...` syntax](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/patterns.html#range-patterns)
for inclusive range patterns (i.e., ranges where the end value is *included* in the range) is no longer 
accepted in Rust 2021. It has been superseded by `..=`, which is consistent with expressions.

For example, the following code which uses `...` in a pattern will produce an error instead of 
just a lint in Rust 2021:

```rust
pub fn less_or_eq_to_100(n: u8) -> bool {
  matches!(n, 0...100) // should be `0..=100`
}
```

## Migrations 

If your Rust 2015 or 2018 code does not produce any warnings for `bare_trait_objects` 
or `ellipsis_inclusive_range_patterns` and you've not allowed these lints through the 
use of `#![allow()]` or some other mechanism, then there's no need to migrate.

To automatically migrate any crate that uses `...` in patterns or does not use `dyn` with
trait objects, you can run `cargo fix --edition`.

---

# Or patterns in macro-rules

## Summary

- How patterns work in `macro_rules` macros changes slightly:
	- `$_:pat` in `macro_rules` now matches usage of `|` too: e.g. `A | B`.
	- The new `$_:pat_param` behaves like `$_:pat` did before; it does not match (top level) `|`.
	- `$_:pat_param` is available in all editions.

## Details

Starting in Rust 1.53.0, [patterns](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/patterns.html)
are extended to support `|` nested anywhere in the pattern.
This enables you to write `Some(1 | 2)` instead of `Some(1) | Some(2)`.
Since this was simply not allowed before, this is not a breaking change.

However, this change also affects [`macro_rules` macros](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/macros-by-example.html).
Such macros can accept patterns using the `:pat` fragment specifier.
Currently, `:pat` does *not* match top level `|`, since before Rust 1.53,
not all patterns (at all nested levels) could contain a `|`.
Macros that accept patterns like `A | B`,
such as [`matches!()`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.51.0/std/macro.matches.html)
use something like `$($_:pat)|+`. 

Because this would potentially break existing macros, the meaning of `:pat` did 
not change in Rust 1.53.0 to include `|`. Instead, that change happens in Rust 2021. 
In the new edition, the `:pat` fragment specifier *will* match `A | B`.

`$_:pat` fragments in Rust 2021 cannot be followed by an explicit `|`. Since there are times 
that one still wishes to match pattern fragments followed by a `|`, the fragment specified `:pat_param` 
has been added to retain the older behavior.

It's important to remember that editions are _per crate_, so the only relevant edition is the edition
of the crate where the macro is defined. The edition of the crate where the macro is used does not 
change how the macro works.

## Migration 

A lint, `rust_2021_incompatible_or_patterns`, gets triggered whenever there is a use `$_:pat` which
will change meaning in Rust 2021. 

You can automatically migrate your code to be Rust 2021 Edition compatible or ensure it is already compatible by
running:

```sh
cargo fix --edition
```

If you have a macro which relies on `$_:pat` not matching the top level use of `|` in patterns, 
you'll need to change each occurrence of `$_:pat` to `$_:pat_param`.

For example:

```rust
macro_rules! my_macro { 
	($x:pat | $y:pat) => {
		// TODO: implementation
	} 
}

// This macro works in Rust 2018 since `$x:pat` does not match against `|`:
my_macro!(1 | 2);

// In Rust 2021 however, the `$_:pat` fragment matches `|` and is not allowed
// to be followed by a `|`. To make sure this macro still works in Rust 2021
// change the macro to the following:
macro_rules! my_macro { 
	($x:pat_param | $y:pat) => { // <- this line is different
		// TODO: implementation
	} 
}
```

---

# C-string literals

## Summary

- Literals of the form `c"foo"` or `cr"foo"` represent a string of type [`&core::ffi::CStr`][CStr].

[CStr]: ../../core/ffi/struct.CStr.html

## Details

Starting with Rust 1.77, C-strings can be written using C-string literal syntax with the `c` or `cr` prefix.

Previously, it was challenging to properly produce a valid string literal that could interoperate with C APIs which terminate with a NUL byte.
The [`cstr`] crate was a popular solution, but that required compiling a proc-macro which was quite expensive.
Now, C-strings can be written directly using literal syntax notation, which will generate a value of type [`&core::ffi::CStr`][CStr] which is automatically terminated with a NUL byte.

```rust,edition2021
# use core::ffi::CStr;

assert_eq!(c"hello", CStr::from_bytes_with_nul(b"hello\0").unwrap());
assert_eq!(
    c"byte escapes \xff work",
    CStr::from_bytes_with_nul(b"byte escapes \xff work\0").unwrap()
);
assert_eq!(
    c"unicode escapes \u{00E6} work",
    CStr::from_bytes_with_nul(b"unicode escapes \xc3\xa6 work\0").unwrap()
);
assert_eq!(
    c"unicode characters αβγ encoded as UTF-8",
    CStr::from_bytes_with_nul(
        b"unicode characters \xce\xb1\xce\xb2\xce\xb3 encoded as UTF-8\0"
    )
    .unwrap()
);
assert_eq!(
    c"strings can continue \
        on multiple lines",
    CStr::from_bytes_with_nul(b"strings can continue on multiple lines\0").unwrap()
);
```

C-strings do not allow interior NUL bytes (such as with a `\0` escape).

Similar to regular strings, C-strings also support "raw" syntax with the `cr` prefix.
These raw C-strings do not process backslash escapes which can make it easier to write strings that contain backslashes.
Double-quotes can be included by surrounding the quotes with the `#` character.
Multiple `#` characters can be used to avoid ambiguity with internal `"#` sequences.

```rust,edition2021
assert_eq!(cr"foo", c"foo");
// Number signs can be used to embed interior double quotes.
assert_eq!(cr#""foo""#, c"\"foo\"");
// This requires two #.
assert_eq!(cr##""foo"#"##, c"\"foo\"#");
// Escapes are not processed.
assert_eq!(cr"C:\foo", c"C:\\foo");
```

See [The Reference] for more details.

[`cstr`]: https://crates.io/crates/cstr
[The Reference]: ../../reference/tokens.html#c-string-and-raw-c-string-literals

## Migration

Migration is only necessary for macros which may have been assuming a sequence of tokens that looks similar to `c"…"` or `cr"…"`, which previous to the 2021 edition would tokenize as two separate tokens, but in 2021 appears as a single token.

As part of the [syntax reservation] for the 2021 edition, any macro input which may run into this issue should issue a warning from the `rust_2021_prefixes_incompatible_syntax` migration lint.
See that chapter for more detail.

[syntax reservation]: reserved-syntax.md
