# Idioms

[Idioms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programming_idiom) are commonly used
styles, guidelines and patterns largely agreed upon by a community. Writing
idiomatic code allows other developers to understand better what is happening.

After all, the computer only cares about the machine code that is generated by
the compiler. Instead, the source code is mainly beneficial to the developer.
So, since we have this abstraction layer, why not make it more readable?

Remember the [KISS principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KISS_principle):
"Keep It Simple, Stupid". It claims that "most systems work best if they are
kept simple rather than made complicated; therefore, simplicity should be a key
goal in design, and unnecessary complexity should be avoided".

> Code is there for humans, not computers, to understand.


---

# Use borrowed types for arguments

## Description

Using a target of a deref coercion can increase the flexibility of your code
when you are deciding which argument type to use for a function argument. In
this way, the function will accept more input types.

This is not limited to slice-able or fat pointer types. In fact, you should
always prefer using the **borrowed type** over **borrowing the owned type**.
Such as `&str` over `&String`, `&[T]` over `&Vec<T>`, or `&T` over `&Box<T>`.

Using borrowed types you can avoid layers of indirection for those instances
where the owned type already provides a layer of indirection. For instance, a
`String` has a layer of indirection, so a `&String` will have two layers of
indirection. We can avoid this by using `&str` instead, and letting `&String`
coerce to a `&str` whenever the function is invoked.

## Example

For this example, we will illustrate some differences for using `&String` as a
function argument versus using a `&str`, but the ideas apply as well to using
`&Vec<T>` versus using a `&[T]` or using a `&Box<T>` versus a `&T`.

Consider an example where we wish to determine if a word contains three
consecutive vowels. We don't need to own the string to determine this, so we
will take a reference.

The code might look something like this:

```rust
fn three_vowels(word: &String) -> bool {
    let mut vowel_count = 0;
    for c in word.chars() {
        match c {
            'a' | 'e' | 'i' | 'o' | 'u' => {
                vowel_count += 1;
                if vowel_count >= 3 {
                    return true;
                }
            }
            _ => vowel_count = 0,
        }
    }
    false
}

fn main() {
    let ferris = "Ferris".to_string();
    let curious = "Curious".to_string();
    println!("{}: {}", ferris, three_vowels(&ferris));
    println!("{}: {}", curious, three_vowels(&curious));

    // This works fine, but the following two lines would fail:
    // println!("Ferris: {}", three_vowels("Ferris"));
    // println!("Curious: {}", three_vowels("Curious"));
}
```

This works fine because we are passing a `&String` type as a parameter. If we
remove the comments on the last two lines, the example will fail. This is
because a `&str` type will not coerce to a `&String` type. We can fix this by
simply modifying the type for our argument.

For instance, if we change our function declaration to:

```rust, ignore
fn three_vowels(word: &str) -> bool {
```

then both versions will compile and print the same output.

```bash
Ferris: false
Curious: true
```

But wait, that's not all! There is more to this story. It's likely that you may
say to yourself: that doesn't matter, I will never be using a `&'static str` as
an input anyways (as we did when we used `"Ferris"`). Even ignoring this special
example, you may still find that using `&str` will give you more flexibility
than using a `&String`.

Let's now take an example where someone gives us a sentence, and we want to
determine if any of the words in the sentence contain three consecutive vowels.
We probably should make use of the function we have already defined and simply
feed in each word from the sentence.

An example of this could look like this:

```rust
fn three_vowels(word: &str) -> bool {
    let mut vowel_count = 0;
    for c in word.chars() {
        match c {
            'a' | 'e' | 'i' | 'o' | 'u' => {
                vowel_count += 1;
                if vowel_count >= 3 {
                    return true;
                }
            }
            _ => vowel_count = 0,
        }
    }
    false
}

fn main() {
    let sentence_string =
        "Once upon a time, there was a friendly curious crab named Ferris".to_string();
    for word in sentence_string.split(' ') {
        if three_vowels(word) {
            println!("{word} has three consecutive vowels!");
        }
    }
}
```

Running this example using our function declared with an argument type `&str`
will yield

```bash
curious has three consecutive vowels!
```

However, this example will not run when our function is declared with an
argument type `&String`. This is because string slices are a `&str` and not a
`&String` which would require an allocation to be converted to `&String` which
is not implicit, whereas converting from `String` to `&str` is cheap and
implicit.

## See also

- [Rust Language Reference on Type Coercions](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-coercions.html)
- For more discussion on how to handle `String` and `&str` see
  [this blog series (2015)](https://web.archive.org/web/20201112023149/https://hermanradtke.com/2015/05/03/string-vs-str-in-rust-functions.html)
  by Herman J. Radtke III
- [Steve Klabnik's Blogpost on 'When should I use String vs &str?'](https://archive.ph/LBpD0)


---

# Concatenating strings with `format!`

## Description

It is possible to build up strings using the `push` and `push_str` methods on a
mutable `String`, or using its `+` operator. However, it is often more
convenient to use `format!`, especially where there is a mix of literal and
non-literal strings.

## Example

```rust
fn say_hello(name: &str) -> String {
    // We could construct the result string manually.
    // let mut result = "Hello ".to_owned();
    // result.push_str(name);
    // result.push('!');
    // result

    // But using format! is better.
    format!("Hello {name}!")
}
```

## Advantages

Using `format!` is usually the most succinct and readable way to combine
strings.

## Disadvantages

It is usually not the most efficient way to combine strings - a series of `push`
operations on a mutable string is usually the most efficient (especially if the
string has been pre-allocated to the expected size).


---

# Constructors

## Description

Rust does not have constructors as a language construct. Instead, the convention
is to use an [associated function][associated function] `new` to create an
object:

````rust
/// Time in seconds.
///
/// # Example
///
/// ```
/// let s = Second::new(42);
/// assert_eq!(42, s.value());
/// ```
pub struct Second {
    value: u64,
}

impl Second {
    // Constructs a new instance of [`Second`].
    // Note this is an associated function - no self.
    pub fn new(value: u64) -> Self {
        Self { value }
    }

    /// Returns the value in seconds.
    pub fn value(&self) -> u64 {
        self.value
    }
}
````

## Default Constructors

Rust supports default constructors with the [`Default`][std-default] trait:

````rust
/// Time in seconds.
///
/// # Example
///
/// ```
/// let s = Second::default();
/// assert_eq!(0, s.value());
/// ```
pub struct Second {
    value: u64,
}

impl Second {
    /// Returns the value in seconds.
    pub fn value(&self) -> u64 {
        self.value
    }
}

impl Default for Second {
    fn default() -> Self {
        Self { value: 0 }
    }
}
````

`Default` can also be derived if all types of all fields implement `Default`,
like they do with `Second`:

````rust
/// Time in seconds.
///
/// # Example
///
/// ```
/// let s = Second::default();
/// assert_eq!(0, s.value());
/// ```
#[derive(Default)]
pub struct Second {
    value: u64,
}

impl Second {
    /// Returns the value in seconds.
    pub fn value(&self) -> u64 {
        self.value
    }
}
````

**Note:** It is common and expected for types to implement both `Default` and an
empty `new` constructor. `new` is the constructor convention in Rust, and users
expect it to exist, so if it is reasonable for the basic constructor to take no
arguments, then it should, even if it is functionally identical to default.

**Hint:** The advantage of implementing or deriving `Default` is that your type
can now be used where a `Default` implementation is required, most prominently,
any of the [`*or_default` functions in the standard library][std-or-default].

## See also

- The [default idiom](default.md) for a more in-depth description of the
  `Default` trait.

- The [builder pattern](../patterns/creational/builder.md) for constructing
  objects where there are multiple configurations.

- [API Guidelines/C-COMMON-TRAITS][API Guidelines/C-COMMON-TRAITS] for
  implementing both, `Default` and `new`.

[associated function]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/book/ch05-03-method-syntax.html#associated-functions
[std-default]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/default/trait.Default.html
[std-or-default]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/?search=or_default
[API Guidelines/C-COMMON-TRAITS]: https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/interoperability.html#types-eagerly-implement-common-traits-c-common-traits


---

# The `Default` Trait

## Description

Many types in Rust have a [constructor]. However, this is *specific* to the
type; Rust cannot abstract over "everything that has a `new()` method". To allow
this, the [`Default`] trait was conceived, which can be used with containers and
other generic types (e.g. see [`Option::unwrap_or_default()`]). Notably, some
containers already implement it where applicable.

Not only do one-element containers like `Cow`, `Box` or `Arc` implement
`Default` for contained `Default` types, one can automatically
`#[derive(Default)]` for structs whose fields all implement it, so the more
types implement `Default`, the more useful it becomes.

On the other hand, constructors can take multiple arguments, while the
`default()` method does not. There can even be multiple constructors with
different names, but there can only be one `Default` implementation per type.

## Example

```rust
use std::{path::PathBuf, time::Duration};

// note that we can simply auto-derive Default here.
#[derive(Default, Debug, PartialEq)]
struct MyConfiguration {
    // Option defaults to None
    output: Option<PathBuf>,
    // Vecs default to empty vector
    search_path: Vec<PathBuf>,
    // Duration defaults to zero time
    timeout: Duration,
    // bool defaults to false
    check: bool,
}

impl MyConfiguration {
    // add setters here
}

fn main() {
    // construct a new instance with default values
    let mut conf = MyConfiguration::default();
    // do something with conf here
    conf.check = true;
    println!("conf = {conf:#?}");

    // partial initialization with default values, creates the same instance
    let conf1 = MyConfiguration {
        check: true,
        ..Default::default()
    };
    assert_eq!(conf, conf1);
}
```

## See also

- The [constructor] idiom is another way to generate instances that may or may
  not be "default"
- The [`Default`] documentation (scroll down for the list of implementors)
- [`Option::unwrap_or_default()`]
- [`derive(new)`]

[constructor]: ctor.md
[`Default`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/default/trait.Default.html
[`Option::unwrap_or_default()`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/option/enum.Option.html#method.unwrap_or_default
[`derive(new)`]: https://crates.io/crates/derive-new/


---

# Collections are smart pointers

## Description

Use the [`Deref`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.Deref.html) trait to
treat collections like smart pointers, offering owning and borrowed views of
data.

## Example

```rust,ignore
use std::ops::Deref;

struct Vec<T> {
    data: RawVec<T>,
    //..
}

impl<T> Deref for Vec<T> {
    type Target = [T];

    fn deref(&self) -> &[T] {
        //..
    }
}
```

A `Vec<T>` is an owning collection of `T`s, while a slice (`&[T]`) is a borrowed
collection of `T`s. Implementing `Deref` for `Vec` allows implicit dereferencing
from `&Vec<T>` to `&[T]` and includes the relationship in auto-dereferencing
searches. Most methods you might expect to be implemented for `Vec`s are instead
implemented for slices.

Also `String` and `&str` have a similar relation.

## Motivation

Ownership and borrowing are key aspects of the Rust language. Data structures
must account for these semantics properly to give a good user experience. When
implementing a data structure that owns its data, offering a borrowed view of
that data allows for more flexible APIs.

## Advantages

Most methods can be implemented only for the borrowed view, they are then
implicitly available for the owning view.

Gives clients a choice between borrowing or taking ownership of data.

## Disadvantages

Methods and traits only available via dereferencing are not taken into account
when bounds checking, so generic programming with data structures using this
pattern can get complex (see the `Borrow` and `AsRef` traits, etc.).

## Discussion

Smart pointers and collections are analogous: a smart pointer points to a single
object, whereas a collection points to many objects. From the point of view of
the type system, there is little difference between the two. A collection owns
its data if the only way to access each datum is via the collection and the
collection is responsible for deleting the data (even in cases of shared
ownership, some kind of borrowed view may be appropriate). If a collection owns
its data, it is usually useful to provide a view of the data as borrowed so that
it can be referenced multiple times.

Most smart pointers (e.g., `Foo<T>`) implement `Deref<Target=T>`. However,
collections will usually dereference to a custom type. `[T]` and `str` have some
language support, but in the general case, this is not necessary. `Foo<T>` can
implement `Deref<Target=Bar<T>>` where `Bar` is a dynamically sized type and
`&Bar<T>` is a borrowed view of the data in `Foo<T>`.

Commonly, ordered collections will implement `Index` for `Range`s to provide
slicing syntax. The target will be the borrowed view.

## See also

- [Deref polymorphism anti-pattern](../anti_patterns/deref.md).
- [Documentation for `Deref` trait](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.Deref.html).


---

# Finalisation in destructors

## Description

Rust does not provide the equivalent to `finally` blocks - code that will be
executed no matter how a function is exited. Instead, an object's destructor can
be used to run code that must be run before exit.

## Example

```rust,ignore
fn baz() -> Result<(), ()> {
    // some code
}

fn bar() -> Result<(), ()> {
    // These don't need to be defined inside the function.
    struct Foo;

    // Implement a destructor for Foo.
    impl Drop for Foo {
        fn drop(&mut self) {
            println!("exit");
        }
    }

    // The destructor of _exit will run however the function `bar` is exited.
    let _exit = Foo;
    // Implicit return with `?` operator.
    baz()?;
    // Normal return.
    Ok(())
}
```

## Motivation

If a function has multiple return points, then executing code on exit becomes
difficult and repetitive (and thus bug-prone). This is especially the case where
return is implicit due to a macro. A common case is the `?` operator which
returns if the result is an `Err`, but continues if it is `Ok`. `?` is used as
an exception handling mechanism, but unlike Java (which has `finally`), there is
no way to schedule code to run in both the normal and exceptional cases.
Panicking will also exit a function early.

## Advantages

Code in destructors will (nearly) always be run - copes with panics, early
returns, etc.

## Disadvantages

It is not guaranteed that destructors will run. For example, if there is an
infinite loop in a function or if running a function crashes before exit.
Destructors are also not run in the case of a panic in an already panicking
thread. Therefore, destructors cannot be relied on as finalizers where it is
absolutely essential that finalisation happens.

This pattern introduces some hard to notice, implicit code. Reading a function
gives no clear indication of destructors to be run on exit. This can make
debugging tricky.

Requiring an object and `Drop` impl just for finalisation is heavy on
boilerplate.

## Discussion

There is some subtlety about how exactly to store the object used as a
finalizer. It must be kept alive until the end of the function and must then be
destroyed. The object must always be a value or uniquely owned pointer (e.g.,
`Box<Foo>`). If a shared pointer (such as `Rc`) is used, then the finalizer can
be kept alive beyond the lifetime of the function. For similar reasons, the
finalizer should not be moved or returned.

The finalizer must be assigned into a variable, otherwise it will be destroyed
immediately, rather than when it goes out of scope. The variable name must start
with `_` if the variable is only used as a finalizer, otherwise the compiler
will warn that the finalizer is never used. However, do not call the variable
`_` with no suffix - in that case it will be destroyed immediately.

In Rust, destructors are run when an object goes out of scope. This happens
whether we reach the end of block, there is an early return, or the program
panics. When panicking, Rust unwinds the stack running destructors for each
object in each stack frame. So, destructors get called even if the panic happens
in a function being called.

If a destructor panics while unwinding, there is no good action to take, so Rust
aborts the thread immediately, without running further destructors. This means
that destructors are not absolutely guaranteed to run. It also means that you
must take extra care in your destructors not to panic, since it could leave
resources in an unexpected state.

## See also

[RAII guards](../patterns/behavioural/RAII.md).


---

# `mem::{take(_), replace(_)}` to keep owned values in changed enums

## Description

Say we have a `&mut MyEnum` which has (at least) two variants,
`A { name: String, x: u8 }` and `B { name: String }`. Now we want to change
`MyEnum::A` to a `B` if `x` is zero, while keeping `MyEnum::B` intact.

We can do this without cloning the `name`.

## Example

```rust
use std::mem;

enum MyEnum {
    A { name: String, x: u8 },
    B { name: String },
}

fn a_to_b(e: &mut MyEnum) {
    if let MyEnum::A { name, x: 0 } = e {
        // This takes out our `name` and puts in an empty String instead
        // (note that empty strings don't allocate).
        // Then, construct the new enum variant (which will
        // be assigned to `*e`).
        *e = MyEnum::B {
            name: mem::take(name),
        }
    }
}
```

This also works with more variants:

```rust
use std::mem;

enum MultiVariateEnum {
    A { name: String },
    B { name: String },
    C,
    D,
}

fn swizzle(e: &mut MultiVariateEnum) {
    use MultiVariateEnum::*;
    *e = match e {
        // Ownership rules do not allow taking `name` by value, but we cannot
        // take the value out of a mutable reference, unless we replace it:
        A { name } => B {
            name: mem::take(name),
        },
        B { name } => A {
            name: mem::take(name),
        },
        C => D,
        D => C,
    }
}
```

## Motivation

When working with enums, we may want to change an enum value in place, perhaps
to another variant. This is usually done in two phases to keep the borrow
checker happy. In the first phase, we observe the existing value and look at its
parts to decide what to do next. In the second phase we may conditionally change
the value (as in the example above).

The borrow checker won't allow us to take out `name` of the enum (because
*something* must be there.) We could of course `.clone()` name and put the clone
into our `MyEnum::B`, but that would be an instance of the
[Clone to satisfy the borrow checker](../anti_patterns/borrow_clone.md)
anti-pattern. Anyway, we can avoid the extra allocation by changing `e` with
only a mutable borrow.

`mem::take` lets us swap out the value, replacing it with its default value, and
returning the previous value. For `String`, the default value is an empty
`String`, which does not need to allocate. As a result, we get the original
`name` *as an owned value*. We can then wrap this in another enum.

**NOTE:** `mem::replace` is very similar, but allows us to specify what to
replace the value with. An equivalent to our `mem::take` line would be
`mem::replace(name, String::new())`.

Note, however, that if we are using an `Option` and want to replace its value
with a `None`, `Option`’s `take()` method provides a shorter and more idiomatic
alternative.

## Advantages

Look ma, no allocation! Also you may feel like Indiana Jones while doing it.

## Disadvantages

This gets a bit wordy. Getting it wrong repeatedly will make you hate the borrow
checker. The compiler may fail to optimize away the double store, resulting in
reduced performance as opposed to what you'd do in unsafe languages.

Furthermore, the type you are taking needs to implement the
[`Default` trait](./default.md). However, if the type you're working with
doesn't implement this, you can instead use `mem::replace`.

## Discussion

This pattern is only of interest in Rust. In GC'd languages, you'd take the
reference to the value by default (and the GC would keep track of refs), and in
other low-level languages like C you'd simply alias the pointer and fix things
later.

However, in Rust, we have to do a little more work to do this. An owned value
may only have one owner, so to take it out, we need to put something back in –
like Indiana Jones, replacing the artifact with a bag of sand.

## See also

This gets rid of the
[Clone to satisfy the borrow checker](../anti_patterns/borrow_clone.md)
anti-pattern in a specific case.


---

# On-Stack Dynamic Dispatch

## Description

We can dynamically dispatch over multiple values, however, to do so, we need to
declare multiple variables to bind differently-typed objects. To extend the
lifetime as necessary, we can use deferred conditional initialization, as seen
below:

## Example

```rust
use std::io;
use std::fs;

# fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
# let arg = "-";

// We need to describe the type to get dynamic dispatch.
let readable: &mut dyn io::Read = if arg == "-" {
    &mut io::stdin()
} else {
    &mut fs::File::open(arg)?
};

// Read from `readable` here.

# Ok(())
# }
```

## Motivation

Rust monomorphises code by default. This means a copy of the code will be
generated for each type it is used with and optimized independently. While this
allows for very fast code on the hot path, it also bloats the code in places
where performance is not of the essence, thus costing compile time and cache
usage.

Luckily, Rust allows us to use dynamic dispatch, but we have to explicitly ask
for it.

## Advantages

We do not need to allocate anything on the heap. Neither do we need to
initialize something we won't use later, nor do we need to monomorphize the
whole code that follows to work with both `File` or `Stdin`.

## Disadvantages

Before Rust 1.79.0, the code needed two `let` bindings with deferred
initialization, which made up more moving parts than the `Box`-based version:

```rust,ignore
// We still need to ascribe the type for dynamic dispatch.
let readable: Box<dyn io::Read> = if arg == "-" {
    Box::new(io::stdin())
} else {
    Box::new(fs::File::open(arg)?)
};
// Read from `readable` here.
```

Luckily, this disadvantage is now gone. Yay!

## Discussion

Since Rust 1.79.0, the compiler will automatically extend the lifetimes of
temporary values within `&` or `&mut` as long as possible within the scope of
the function.

This means we can simply use a `&mut` value here without worrying about placing
the contents into some `let` binding (which would have been needed for deferred
initialization, which was the solution used before that change).

We still have a place for each value (even if that place is temporary), the
compiler knows the size of each value and each borrowed value outlives all
references borrowed from it.

## See also

- [Finalisation in destructors](dtor-finally.md) and
  [RAII guards](../patterns/behavioural/RAII.md) can benefit from tight control
  over lifetimes.
- For conditionally filled `Option<&T>`s of (mutable) references, one can
  initialize an `Option<T>` directly and use its [`.as_ref()`] method to get an
  optional reference.

[`.as_ref()`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/option/enum.Option.html#method.as_ref


---

# FFI Idioms

Writing FFI code is an entire course in itself. However, there are several
idioms here that can act as pointers, and avoid traps for inexperienced users of
`unsafe` Rust.

This section contains idioms that may be useful when doing FFI.

1. [Idiomatic Errors](./errors.md) - Error handling with integer codes and
   sentinel return values (such as `NULL` pointers)

2. [Accepting Strings](./accepting-strings.md) with minimal unsafe code

3. [Passing Strings](./passing-strings.md) to FFI functions


---

# Error Handling in FFI

## Description

In foreign languages like C, errors are represented by return codes. However,
Rust's type system allows much more rich error information to be captured and
propagated through a full type.

This best practice shows different kinds of error codes, and how to expose them
in a usable way:

1. Flat Enums should be converted to integers and returned as codes.
2. Structured Enums should be converted to an integer code with a string error
   message for detail.
3. Custom Error Types should become "transparent", with a C representation.

## Code Example

### Flat Enums

```rust,ignore
enum DatabaseError {
    IsReadOnly = 1,    // user attempted a write operation
    IOError = 2,       // user should read the C errno() for what it was
    FileCorrupted = 3, // user should run a repair tool to recover it
}

impl From<DatabaseError> for libc::c_int {
    fn from(e: DatabaseError) -> libc::c_int {
        (e as i8).into()
    }
}
```

### Structured Enums

```rust,ignore
pub mod errors {
    enum DatabaseError {
        IsReadOnly,
        IOError(std::io::Error),
        FileCorrupted(String), // message describing the issue
    }

    impl From<DatabaseError> for libc::c_int {
        fn from(e: DatabaseError) -> libc::c_int {
            match e {
                DatabaseError::IsReadOnly => 1,
                DatabaseError::IOError(_) => 2,
                DatabaseError::FileCorrupted(_) => 3,
            }
        }
    }
}

pub mod c_api {
    use super::errors::DatabaseError;
    use core::ptr;

    #[no_mangle]
    pub extern "C" fn db_error_description(
        e: Option<ptr::NonNull<DatabaseError>>,
    ) -> Option<ptr::NonNull<libc::c_char>> {
        // SAFETY: we assume that the lifetime of `e` is greater than
        // the current stack frame.
        let error = unsafe { e?.as_ref() };

        let error_str: String = match error {
            DatabaseError::IsReadOnly => {
                format!("cannot write to read-only database")
            }
            DatabaseError::IOError(e) => {
                format!("I/O Error: {e}")
            }
            DatabaseError::FileCorrupted(s) => {
                format!("File corrupted, run repair: {}", &s)
            }
        };

        let error_bytes = error_str.as_bytes();

        let c_error = unsafe {
            // SAFETY: copying error_bytes to an allocated buffer with a '\0'
            // byte at the end.
            let buffer = ptr::NonNull::<u8>::new(libc::malloc(error_bytes.len() + 1).cast())?;

            buffer
                .as_ptr()
                .copy_from_nonoverlapping(error_bytes.as_ptr(), error_bytes.len());
            buffer.as_ptr().add(error_bytes.len()).write(0_u8);
            buffer
        };

        Some(c_error.cast())
    }
}
```

### Custom Error Types

```rust,ignore
struct ParseError {
    expected: char,
    line: u32,
    ch: u16,
}

impl ParseError {
    /* ... */
}

/* Create a second version which is exposed as a C structure */
#[repr(C)]
pub struct parse_error {
    pub expected: libc::c_char,
    pub line: u32,
    pub ch: u16,
}

impl From<ParseError> for parse_error {
    fn from(e: ParseError) -> parse_error {
        let ParseError { expected, line, ch } = e;
        parse_error { expected, line, ch }
    }
}
```

## Advantages

This ensures that the foreign language has clear access to error information
while not compromising the Rust code's API at all.

## Disadvantages

It's a lot of typing, and some types may not be able to be converted easily to
C.


---

# Accepting Strings

## Description

When accepting strings via FFI through pointers, there are two principles that
should be followed:

1. Keep foreign strings "borrowed", rather than copying them directly.
2. Minimize the amount of complexity and `unsafe` code involved in converting
   from a C-style string to native Rust strings.

## Motivation

The strings used in C have different behaviours to those used in Rust, namely:

- C strings are null-terminated while Rust strings store their length
- C strings can contain any arbitrary non-zero byte while Rust strings must be
  UTF-8
- C strings are accessed and manipulated using `unsafe` pointer operations while
  interactions with Rust strings go through safe methods

The Rust standard library comes with C equivalents of Rust's `String` and `&str`
called `CString` and `&CStr`, that allow us to avoid a lot of the complexity and
`unsafe` code involved in converting between C strings and Rust strings.

The `&CStr` type also allows us to work with borrowed data, meaning passing
strings between Rust and C is a zero-cost operation.

## Code Example

```rust,ignore
pub mod unsafe_module {

    // other module content

    /// Log a message at the specified level.
    ///
    /// # Safety
    ///
    /// It is the caller's guarantee to ensure `msg`:
    ///
    /// - is not a null pointer
    /// - points to valid, initialized data
    /// - points to memory ending in a null byte
    /// - won't be mutated for the duration of this function call
    #[no_mangle]
    pub unsafe extern "C" fn mylib_log(msg: *const libc::c_char, level: libc::c_int) {
        let level: crate::LogLevel = match level { /* ... */ };

        // SAFETY: The caller has already guaranteed this is okay (see the
        // `# Safety` section of the doc-comment).
        let msg_str: &str = match std::ffi::CStr::from_ptr(msg).to_str() {
            Ok(s) => s,
            Err(e) => {
                crate::log_error("FFI string conversion failed");
                return;
            }
        };

        crate::log(msg_str, level);
    }
}
```

## Advantages

The example is written to ensure that:

1. The `unsafe` block is as small as possible.
2. The pointer with an "untracked" lifetime becomes a "tracked" shared reference

Consider an alternative, where the string is actually copied:

```rust,ignore
pub mod unsafe_module {

    // other module content

    pub extern "C" fn mylib_log(msg: *const libc::c_char, level: libc::c_int) {
        // DO NOT USE THIS CODE.
        // IT IS UGLY, VERBOSE, AND CONTAINS A SUBTLE BUG.

        let level: crate::LogLevel = match level { /* ... */ };

        let msg_len = unsafe { /* SAFETY: strlen is what it is, I guess? */
            libc::strlen(msg)
        };

        let mut msg_data = Vec::with_capacity(msg_len + 1);

        let msg_cstr: std::ffi::CString = unsafe {
            // SAFETY: copying from a foreign pointer expected to live
            // for the entire stack frame into owned memory
            std::ptr::copy_nonoverlapping(msg, msg_data.as_mut(), msg_len);

            msg_data.set_len(msg_len + 1);

            std::ffi::CString::from_vec_with_nul(msg_data).unwrap()
        }

        let msg_str: String = unsafe {
            match msg_cstr.into_string() {
                Ok(s) => s,
                Err(e) => {
                    crate::log_error("FFI string conversion failed");
                    return;
                }
            }
        };

        crate::log(&msg_str, level);
    }
}
```

This code is inferior to the original in two respects:

1. There is much more `unsafe` code, and more importantly, more invariants it
   must uphold.
2. Due to the extensive arithmetic required, there is a bug in this version that
   causes Rust `undefined behaviour`.

The bug here is a simple mistake in pointer arithmetic: the string was copied,
all `msg_len` bytes of it. However, the `NUL` terminator at the end was not.

The Vector then had its size *set* to the length of the *zero padded string* --
rather than *resized* to it, which could have added a zero at the end. As a
result, the last byte in the Vector is uninitialized memory. When the `CString`
is created at the bottom of the block, its read of the Vector will cause
`undefined behaviour`!

Like many such issues, this would be difficult issue to track down. Sometimes it
would panic because the string was not `UTF-8`, sometimes it would put a weird
character at the end of the string, sometimes it would just completely crash.

## Disadvantages

None?


---

# Passing Strings

## Description

When passing strings to FFI functions, there are four principles that should be
followed:

1. Make the lifetime of owned strings as long as possible.
2. Minimize `unsafe` code during the conversion.
3. If the C code can modify the string data, use `Vec` instead of `CString`.
4. Unless the Foreign Function API requires it, the ownership of the string
   should not transfer to the callee.

## Motivation

Rust has built-in support for C-style strings with its `CString` and `CStr`
types. However, there are different approaches one can take with strings that
are being sent to a foreign function call from a Rust function.

The best practice is simple: use `CString` in such a way as to minimize `unsafe`
code. However, a secondary caveat is that *the object must live long enough*,
meaning the lifetime should be maximized. In addition, the documentation
explains that "round-tripping" a `CString` after modification is UB, so
additional work is necessary in that case.

## Code Example

```rust,ignore
pub mod unsafe_module {

    // other module content

    extern "C" {
        fn seterr(message: *const libc::c_char);
        fn geterr(buffer: *mut libc::c_char, size: libc::c_int) -> libc::c_int;
    }

    fn report_error_to_ffi<S: Into<String>>(err: S) -> Result<(), std::ffi::NulError> {
        let c_err = std::ffi::CString::new(err.into())?;

        unsafe {
            // SAFETY: calling an FFI whose documentation says the pointer is
            // const, so no modification should occur
            seterr(c_err.as_ptr());
        }

        Ok(())
        // The lifetime of c_err continues until here
    }

    fn get_error_from_ffi() -> Result<String, std::ffi::IntoStringError> {
        let mut buffer = vec![0u8; 1024];
        unsafe {
            // SAFETY: calling an FFI whose documentation implies
            // that the input need only live as long as the call
            let written: usize = geterr(buffer.as_mut_ptr(), 1023).into();

            buffer.truncate(written + 1);
        }

        std::ffi::CString::new(buffer).unwrap().into_string()
    }
}
```

## Advantages

The example is written in a way to ensure that:

1. The `unsafe` block is as small as possible.
2. The `CString` lives long enough.
3. Errors with typecasts are always propagated when possible.

A common mistake (so common it's in the documentation) is to not use the
variable in the first block:

```rust,ignore
pub mod unsafe_module {

    // other module content

    fn report_error<S: Into<String>>(err: S) -> Result<(), std::ffi::NulError> {
        unsafe {
            // SAFETY: whoops, this contains a dangling pointer!
            seterr(std::ffi::CString::new(err.into())?.as_ptr());
        }
        Ok(())
    }
}
```

This code will result in a dangling pointer, because the lifetime of the
`CString` is not extended by the pointer creation, unlike if a reference were
created.

Another issue frequently raised is that the initialization of a 1k vector of
zeroes is "slow". However, recent versions of Rust actually optimize that
particular macro to a call to `zmalloc`, meaning it is as fast as the operating
system's ability to return zeroed memory (which is quite fast).

## Disadvantages

None?


---

# Iterating over an `Option`

## Description

`Option` can be viewed as a container that contains either zero or one element.
In particular, it implements the `IntoIterator` trait, and as such can be used
with generic code that needs such a type.

## Examples

Since `Option` implements `IntoIterator`, it can be used as an argument to
[`.extend()`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Extend.html#tymethod.extend):

```rust
let turing = Some("Turing");
let mut logicians = vec!["Curry", "Kleene", "Markov"];

logicians.extend(turing);

// equivalent to
if let Some(turing_inner) = turing {
    logicians.push(turing_inner);
}
```

If you need to tack an `Option` to the end of an existing iterator, you can pass
it to
[`.chain()`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html#method.chain):

```rust
let turing = Some("Turing");
let logicians = vec!["Curry", "Kleene", "Markov"];

for logician in logicians.iter().chain(turing.iter()) {
    println!("{logician} is a logician");
}
```

Note that if the `Option` is always `Some`, then it is more idiomatic to use
[`std::iter::once`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/fn.once.html) on the
element instead.

Also, since `Option` implements `IntoIterator`, it's possible to iterate over it
using a `for` loop. This is equivalent to matching it with `if let Some(..)`,
and in most cases you should prefer the latter.

## See also

- [`std::iter::once`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/fn.once.html) is an
  iterator which yields exactly one element. It's a more readable alternative to
  `Some(foo).into_iter()`.

- [`Iterator::filter_map`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html#method.filter_map)
  is a version of
  [`Iterator::map`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html#method.map),
  specialized to mapping functions which return `Option`.

- The [`ref_slice`](https://crates.io/crates/ref_slice) crate provides functions
  for converting an `Option` to a zero- or one-element slice.

- [Documentation for `Option<T>`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/option/enum.Option.html)


---

# Pass variables to closure

## Description

By default, closures capture their environment by borrowing. Or you can use a
`move`-closure to move the whole environment. However, often you want to move
just some variables to the closure, give it a copy of some data, pass by
reference, or perform some other transformation.

Use variable rebinding in a separate scope for that.

## Example

Use

```rust
use std::rc::Rc;

let num1 = Rc::new(1);
let num2 = Rc::new(2);
let num3 = Rc::new(3);
let closure = {
    // `num1` is moved
    let num2 = num2.clone();  // `num2` is cloned
    let num3 = num3.as_ref();  // `num3` is borrowed
    move || {
        *num1 + *num2 + *num3;
    }
};
```

instead of

```rust
use std::rc::Rc;

let num1 = Rc::new(1);
let num2 = Rc::new(2);
let num3 = Rc::new(3);

let num2_cloned = num2.clone();
let num3_borrowed = num3.as_ref();
let closure = move || {
    *num1 + *num2_cloned + *num3_borrowed;
};
```

## Advantages

Copied data are grouped together with the closure definition, so their purpose
is more clear, and they will be dropped immediately even if they are not
consumed by the closure.

The closure uses the same variable names as the surrounding code, whether data
are copied or moved.

## Disadvantages

Additional indentation of the closure body.


---

# `#[non_exhaustive]` and private fields for extensibility

## Description

A small set of scenarios exist where a library author may want to add public
fields to a public struct or new variants to an enum without breaking backwards
compatibility.

Rust offers two solutions to this problem:

- Use `#[non_exhaustive]` on `struct`s, `enum`s, and `enum` variants. For
  extensive documentation on all the places where `#[non_exhaustive]` can be
  used, see
  [the docs](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/attributes/type_system.html#the-non_exhaustive-attribute).

- You may add a private field to a struct to prevent it from being directly
  instantiated or matched against (see Alternative)

## Example

```rust
mod a {
    // Public struct.
    #[non_exhaustive]
    pub struct S {
        pub foo: i32,
    }

    #[non_exhaustive]
    pub enum AdmitMoreVariants {
        VariantA,
        VariantB,
        #[non_exhaustive]
        VariantC {
            a: String,
        },
    }
}

fn print_matched_variants(s: a::S) {
    // Because S is `#[non_exhaustive]`, it cannot be named here and
    // we must use `..` in the pattern.
    let a::S { foo: _, .. } = s;

    let some_enum = a::AdmitMoreVariants::VariantA;
    match some_enum {
        a::AdmitMoreVariants::VariantA => println!("it's an A"),
        a::AdmitMoreVariants::VariantB => println!("it's a b"),

        // .. required because this variant is non-exhaustive as well
        a::AdmitMoreVariants::VariantC { a, .. } => println!("it's a c"),

        // The wildcard match is required because more variants may be
        // added in the future
        _ => println!("it's a new variant"),
    }
}
```

## Alternative: `Private fields` for structs

`#[non_exhaustive]` only works across crate boundaries. Within a crate, the
private field method may be used.

Adding a field to a struct is a mostly backwards compatible change. However, if
a client uses a pattern to deconstruct a struct instance, they might name all
the fields in the struct and adding a new one would break that pattern. The
client could name some fields and use `..` in the pattern, in which case adding
another field is backwards compatible. Making at least one of the struct's
fields private forces clients to use the latter form of patterns, ensuring that
the struct is future-proof.

The downside of this approach is that you might need to add an otherwise
unneeded field to the struct. You can use the `()` type so that there is no
runtime overhead and prepend `_` to the field name to avoid the unused field
warning.

```rust
pub struct S {
    pub a: i32,
    // Because `b` is private, you cannot match on `S` without using `..` and `S`
    //  cannot be directly instantiated or matched against
    _b: (),
}
```

## Discussion

On `struct`s, `#[non_exhaustive]` allows adding additional fields in a backwards
compatible way. It will also prevent clients from using the struct constructor,
even if all the fields are public. This may be helpful, but it's worth
considering if you *want* an additional field to be found by clients as a
compiler error rather than something that may be silently undiscovered.

`#[non_exhaustive]` can be applied to enum variants as well. A
`#[non_exhaustive]` variant behaves in the same way as a `#[non_exhaustive]`
struct.

Use this deliberately and with caution: incrementing the major version when
adding fields or variants is often a better option. `#[non_exhaustive]` may be
appropriate in scenarios where you're modeling an external resource that may
change out-of-sync with your library, but is not a general purpose tool.

### Disadvantages

`#[non_exhaustive]` can make your code much less ergonomic to use, especially
when forced to handle unknown enum variants. It should only be used when these
sorts of evolutions are required **without** incrementing the major version.

When `#[non_exhaustive]` is applied to `enum`s, it forces clients to handle a
wildcard variant. If there is no sensible action to take in this case, this may
lead to awkward code and code paths that are only executed in extremely rare
circumstances. If a client decides to `panic!()` in this scenario, it may have
been better to expose this error at compile time. In fact, `#[non_exhaustive]`
forces clients to handle the "Something else" case; there is rarely a sensible
action to take in this scenario.

## See also

- [RFC introducing #[non_exhaustive] attribute for enums and structs](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/2008-non-exhaustive.md)


---

# Easy doc initialization

## Description

If a struct takes significant effort to initialize when writing docs, it can be
quicker to wrap your example with a helper function which takes the struct as an
argument.

## Motivation

Sometimes there is a struct with multiple or complicated parameters and several
methods. Each of these methods should have examples.

For example:

````rust,ignore
struct Connection {
    name: String,
    stream: TcpStream,
}

impl Connection {
    /// Sends a request over the connection.
    ///
    /// # Example
    /// ```no_run
    /// # // Boilerplate are required to get an example working.
    /// # let stream = TcpStream::connect("127.0.0.1:34254");
    /// # let connection = Connection { name: "foo".to_owned(), stream };
    /// # let request = Request::new("RequestId", RequestType::Get, "payload");
    /// let response = connection.send_request(request);
    /// assert!(response.is_ok());
    /// ```
    fn send_request(&self, request: Request) -> Result<Status, SendErr> {
        // ...
    }

    /// Oh no, all that boilerplate needs to be repeated here!
    fn check_status(&self) -> Status {
        // ...
    }
}
````

## Example

Instead of typing all of this boilerplate to create a `Connection` and
`Request`, it is easier to just create a wrapping helper function which takes
them as arguments:

````rust,ignore
struct Connection {
    name: String,
    stream: TcpStream,
}

impl Connection {
    /// Sends a request over the connection.
    ///
    /// # Example
    /// ```
    /// # fn call_send(connection: Connection, request: Request) {
    /// let response = connection.send_request(request);
    /// assert!(response.is_ok());
    /// # }
    /// ```
    fn send_request(&self, request: Request) -> Result<Status, SendErr> {
        // ...
    }
}
````

**Note** in the above example the line `assert!(response.is_ok());` will not
actually run while testing because it is inside a function which is never
invoked.

## Advantages

This is much more concise and avoids repetitive code in examples.

## Disadvantages

As example is in a function, the code will not be tested. Though it will still
be checked to make sure it compiles when running a `cargo test`. So this pattern
is most useful when you need `no_run`. With this, you do not need to add
`no_run`.

## Discussion

If assertions are not required this pattern works well.

If they are, an alternative can be to create a public method to create a helper
instance which is annotated with `#[doc(hidden)]` (so that users won't see it).
Then this method can be called inside of rustdoc because it is part of the
crate's public API.


---

# Temporary mutability

## Description

Often it is necessary to prepare and process some data, but after that data are
only inspected and never modified. The intention can be made explicit by
redefining the mutable variable as immutable.

It can be done either by processing data within a nested block or by redefining
the variable.

## Example

Say, vector must be sorted before usage.

Using nested block:

```rust,ignore
let data = {
    let mut data = get_vec();
    data.sort();
    data
};

// Here `data` is immutable.
```

Using variable rebinding:

```rust,ignore
let mut data = get_vec();
data.sort();
let data = data;

// Here `data` is immutable.
```

## Advantages

Compiler ensures that you don't accidentally mutate data after some point.

## Disadvantages

Nested block requires additional indentation of block body. One more line to
return data from block or redefine variable.


---

# Return consumed argument on error

## Description

If a fallible function consumes (moves) an argument, return that argument back
inside an error.

## Example

```rust
pub fn send(value: String) -> Result<(), SendError> {
    println!("using {value} in a meaningful way");
    // Simulate non-deterministic fallible action.
    use std::time::SystemTime;
    let period = SystemTime::now()
        .duration_since(SystemTime::UNIX_EPOCH)
        .unwrap();
    if period.subsec_nanos() % 2 == 1 {
        Ok(())
    } else {
        Err(SendError(value))
    }
}

pub struct SendError(String);

fn main() {
    let mut value = "imagine this is very long string".to_string();

    let success = 's: {
        // Try to send value two times.
        for _ in 0..2 {
            value = match send(value) {
                Ok(()) => break 's true,
                Err(SendError(value)) => value,
            }
        }
        false
    };

    println!("success: {success}");
}
```

## Motivation

In case of error you may want to try some alternative way or to retry action in
case of non-deterministic function. But if the argument is always consumed, you
are forced to clone it on every call, which is not very efficient.

The standard library uses this approach in e.g. `String::from_utf8` method. When
given a vector that doesn't contain valid UTF-8, a `FromUtf8Error` is returned.
You can get original vector back using `FromUtf8Error::into_bytes` method.

## Advantages

Better performance because of moving arguments whenever possible.

## Disadvantages

Slightly more complex error types.
